<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Gospel of Luke, An Exposition</title>
      <author><name reg="Erdman, Charles R.">Charles R. Erdman</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>October 11, 2008</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">26881</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2008-10-11">October 11, 2008</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Stephen Hope, Fox in the Stars, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Gospel of Luke</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">An Exposition</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Charles R. Erdman</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Professor of Practical Theology</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Princeton Theological Seminary,</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Princeton, New Jersey</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Philadelphia</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">The Westminster Press</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1936</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>


<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">

<p>
The Bible text printed in boldface is taken from the American Standard
Edition of the Revised Bible, copyright, 1901, by Thomas Nelson &amp; Sons,
and is used by permission.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>

<div>

<p>
TO
THE MEN WHO LONG
TO BE LIKE HIM
</p>

</div>

<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>FOREWORD</head>

<p>
The Gospel of Luke is the most beautiful book in the
world; at least, so it has been called, and those who know it
best are not likely to dispute such praise. The purpose of
this little volume is to place the book in convenient form,
and by an outline and brief comments to aid in focusing the
thought of the reader upon the successive scenes of the
gospel story. These are familiar scenes, but each review
of them more vividly reveals the great central Figure as
supreme among men in the matchless loveliness of his
divine manhood, himself the perfect, the ideal Man.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>INTRODUCTION</head>

<p>
The surpassing beauty of this book betokens
the personal attractiveness of its author and the dignity and importance
of its theme. It was written by Luke, <q>the beloved physician,</q>
and it concerns the life and saving
work of our Lord. The phrase which
describes the writer as <q>the physician,
the beloved one,</q> is full of significance. It was penned by
Paul, when a prisoner in Rome, to his friends in distant
Colossæ. It indicates that Luke was a man of culture and
scientific training and that the charm of his character was
so conspicuous as to be recognized by the Christian
churches of Europe and of Asia. The connection in
which this phrase occurs indicates that Luke was not a Jew
but a Gentile by birth, and further, that he was a close
companion of Paul.
</p>

<p>
To Luke's authorship is attributed not only this <q>Third
Gospel</q> but also <q>The Acts.</q> He was a man of such modesty
that he never mentioned his own name even when
recording the stirring events in which he played so prominent
a part. Nevertheless he revealed himself in every
page of his writings and was evidently a man of broad sympathies,
an acute observer, a careful historian, and a loyal
friend.
</p>

<p>
The story of his companionship with Paul begins in the
record of the apostle's second missionary journey when he
was about to sail from Troas on the memorable voyage
which resulted in establishing Christianity on a new continent.
The two friends journeyed together to Philippi,
where a strong church was founded; but while Paul continued
his travels through Macedonia and Greece, Luke remained
behind, possibly to care for the young converts.
Seven years later when Paul was on his third missionary
tour he seems to have found Luke at Philippi and to have
been accompanied by him on his way to Jerusalem. When
Paul was arrested and was confined for two years at Cæsarea,
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
Luke was his companion. Later they shared together
the perils of the voyage and the shipwreck on the way to
Rome, and the imprisonment in the imperial city. Paul
appears to have been released and then imprisoned a second
time, and when he wrote his last letter, under the shadow
of approaching martyrdom, the only friend to remain faithful
and to comfort him in his loneliness was Luke.
</p>

<p>
As might be expected, the narrative composed by such
an author is characterized by (1) unusual literary beauty;
it is plainly the product of Greek culture. The divine
Spirit chose and equipped a rare instrument in the poetic
and refined personality of Luke and through him gave to
the world that version of the gospel story which is most exquisite
in style and most finished in form.
</p>

<p>
Yet Luke was not only a man of culture, he was also a
Christian physician and thus a man of wide and tender
sympathies, and his narrative is therefore characterized
(2) by its absorbing human interest. It
is a story of real life; it is suffused with
emotion; it is full of gladness and sorrow,
of songs and of tears; it is vocal with praise and with prayer.
</p>

<p>
It is the gospel of childhood. By its tender stories of the
birth of John and of Jesus, it places an unfading halo of
glory about the brow of infancy, and it alone preserves the
precious picture of the boyhood of our Lord. It is the gospel
of womanhood. It sketches for us that immortal group
of women associated with the life of Jesus. We see Elisabeth
and the virgin mother and the aged Anna, the widow
of Nain, the sisters at Bethany, and the repentant sinner,
the sufferer bowed down by Satan and the stranger who
congratulates Mary, the company that minister to Jesus on
his journeys and the <q>daughters of Jerusalem</q> weeping on
the way to the cross.
</p>

<p>
It is the gospel of the home. It gives us glimpses of the
family life at Nazareth, of the scene in the house of Simon,
of the hospitality of Martha and Mary, of the evening meal
with the two disciples at Emmaus and the picture in the
parables of the importunate friend at midnight, of the
woman searching the room for the lost coin and of the prodigal
turning back to his father's house.
</p>

<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>

<p>
It is the gospel of the poor and the lowly; it warns against
the perils of wealth and expresses sympathy and hope for
those who are oppressed by poverty and want. This sympathy
is sounded in the song of Mary, in the first sermon of
the Saviour, in the first Beatitude, <q>Blessed are ye poor.</q>
Luke also records the parables of the Rich Fool and of the
Rich Man and Lazarus, and paints, with Mark, the picture
of the widow offering to the Lord her two mites.
</p>

<p>
It is also the gospel of praise and of prayer, expressions of
the deepest convictions and longings of the human heart.
The Gospel opens with a scene in the Temple at the hour of
incense and with the <q>Magnificat</q> of Mary and the songs
of Zacharias and of the angels. It closes with the benediction
of the ascending Lord and the thanksgiving of his
joyful disciples.
</p>

<p>
Luke, however, was not only a man of culture and a beloved
physician; he was also a companion of Paul and had
traveled with the apostle over a great portion of the Roman
world; therefore he naturally wrote a gospel characterized
by (3) universal interest. Here no narrow prejudice divides
race from race; a despised Samaritan stands as the
supreme example of a neighbor, the angels sing of peace
among men, and the aged Simeon declares that Jesus is to
be a <q>light for revelation to the Gentiles</q> as well as the
glory of Israel. Luke alone gives the data which link the
sacred story to the secular history of the world. His outlook
is unlimited. He regards the good news concerning
Christ as a message which is vital to the welfare and redemption
of the entire human race.
</p>

<p>
These aspects of his Gospel blend with the picture of his
Lord which Luke portrays. The character of Jesus is so
subtle and complex as to defy exact analysis, and yet it is
evident that certain of its features, common
to all, are emphasized successively
by each one of the Gospel writers. Matthew
depicts its majesty, Mark its
strength, and John its sublimity; but
Luke reveals its beauty, and paints a
picture of the ideal Man, the Saviour of the world.
</p>

<p>
As to all the prime elements of perfect manhood, possibly
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
no two persons may agree; yet none would deny that such
was the manhood of Jesus, and none would question that
there are two or three moral qualities which he exhibited in
a superlative degree, qualities upon which Luke lays special
stress.
</p>

<p>
First of all Jesus manifested matchless courage. To
some interpreters this fearlessness has formed the very
essence of the <q>manliness of Christ.</q> He was not a weak
and nerveless preacher of righteousness, but a man of
strength, of dauntless resolve, and of courageous action.
The mob was eager to destroy him as he began his work in
Nazareth, but his enemies quailed before his majestic presence,
as <q>he passing through the midst of them went his
way.</q> He was advised to flee from the realm of Herod but
he flung defiance to the king, beginning his message with
the words, <q>Go and say to that fox.</q> The section of ten
chapters in this Gospel which describes the last journeys of
our Lord opens with a deeply significant phrase, <q>He
steadfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem.</q> Only five
chapters devoted to his ministry precede, only five follow.
During all the long period described in the chapters between,
Jesus plainly foresaw his coming rejection and suffering
and death, but fearlessly and with unfaltering step
he moved onward to the cross. All the heroisms of history
are dwarfed to insignificance by this incomparable courage
of Christ.
</p>

<p>
More obvious still is the boundless and tender sympathy
of this ideal Man. He declared in his first address that he
had come <q>to preach good tidings to the poor: ... to proclaim
release to the captives, and recovering of sight to the
blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised</q>; and as we
follow in his footsteps we see how his tender heart yearned
over all who suffered and were distressed; he dried the tears
of sorrow; he showed his pity for the outcast and the impure;
he received sinners and was entertained by publicans;
he praised Samaritans and comforted the dying thief.
This world has no other picture of such perfect compassion,
tenderness, and love; and these are essential to
true manhood.
</p>

<p>
More mysterious, but none the less real, was his constant
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
faith. His life was lived in continual fellowship with
God. In his first recorded saying he declared, <q>I must be
in my Father's house,</q> and at the last he breathed out his
spirit on the cross with the words, <q>Father, into thy hands
I commend my spirit.</q> All the intervening days of his life
and ministry were filled with ceaseless prayer. On at least
seven other occasions it is stated that he was praying: at his
baptism, ch. 3:21; after healing the leper, ch. 5:16; before
choosing his disciples, ch. 6:12; before Peter's great confession,
ch. 9:18; at his transfiguration, ch. 9:29; before
teaching his disciples to pray, ch. 11:1; in the first agonies
of crucifixion, ch. 23:34. So, too, he taught his disciples
to pray with importunity, ch. 11:5-10, with perseverance,
ch. 18:1-7, and with penitence, ch. 18:9-14. Such trust
in God, such sympathy, such bravery, are surely prominent
among the many elements which are blended in this impressive
portrayal of the ideal Man.
</p>

<p>
However, Luke has written a version of the gospel and
therefore has produced much more than a picture of human
perfection or the story of an ideal life. The gospel is the
<q>good news</q> of salvation secured for
us by our Lord; and in the narrative of
Luke we behold One who was not only
supreme in his manhood but was also the
Saviour of the world. It was in accomplishing this redeeming
work that he revealed such courage and so steadfastly
set his face to go to Jerusalem. The salvation he
secured is inseparable from the cross.
</p>

<p>
It was a salvation provided for all, even as his sympathy
knew no bounds but was extended to the last and the lowest
of men&mdash;to the despised publican, to the outcast sinner,
to the hated Samaritan, to the crucified thief.
</p>

<p>
Then, too, as he ever trusted in his Father, so the salvation
he secured to us is conditioned upon faith in himself as
Redeemer and Lord, a faith which implies repentance and
trust and submission and sacrifice. One must be willing to
count the cost, to abandon anything which stands between
self and the Master. This salvation, however, is wholly of
grace, unmerited, free, provided by the Father for all who
yield themselves to the loving care of his Son.
</p>

<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>

<p>
This salvation was to be proclaimed to all the nations.
Those to whom it became known, and by whom it was accepted,
were to become witnesses to the transforming truth.
For such testimony they would require courage and wide
sympathy and unfaltering faith, and in their courage and
sympathy and faith they would be like their Master who by
such qualities was manifested as the ideal Man as he was
the divine Saviour of the world.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>I. The Preface To the Gospel. Luke 1:1-4</head>

<quote rend="display">
1 Forasmuch as many have taken in hand to draw up a
narrative concerning those matters which have been fulfilled
among us, 2 even as they delivered them unto us, who from
the beginning were eyewitnesses and ministers of the word,
3 it seemed good to me also, having traced the course of all
things accurately from the first, to write unto thee in order,
most excellent Theophilus; 4 that thou mightest know the
certainty concerning the things wherein thou wast instructed.
</quote>

<p>
This preface is a perfect gem of Greek art; even in the English
Version it loses little, if anything, of its literary charm.
As a prologue it is regarded as unsurpassed for brevity, modesty,
and dignity. However, its value lies not in its beauty
but in its testimony to the veracity of the writer and to the
historic worth and absolute credibility of the gospel
story. The fact of inspiration should not blind us to the
human means by which the Spirit of God secured accuracy
in the communication of truth and in the composition of
the Holy Scriptures.
</p>

<p>
Here we are admitted to the study of a great historian.
We see about him his tools and his material; we are informed
as to his motives and methods in work, and are told
of the qualifications he possesses for his great task. First
of all, he has before him many written accounts of the ministry
of Christ. He does not reject these as inaccurate but
regards any one of them as inadequate. By comparing
and combining them he secures valuable outlines for his
more complete narrative.
</p>

<p>
Then, too, he intimates that he is living and writing
amidst the scenes and in the very atmosphere of the events
he is recording; only recently, as he indicates, have these
<q>matters ... been fulfilled.</q> Again, he has access to the
testimony of men who were eyewitnesses of these events
and who have been public teachers of the gospel.
</p>

<p>
Further, he assures us of the absolute accuracy with
which he has investigated the incidents of the life and ministry
of Christ, even from the earliest scenes; he has sifted
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
his material and weighed the evidence and is to record only
established facts.
</p>

<p>
These facts he is to relate <q>in order,</q> that is, in the sequence
of time, and further still, with the system and the
careful regard to proportion and to completeness which
should characterize a scientific, historical composition.
</p>

<p>
Then again he dedicates the book to Theophilus whose
title, <q>most excellent,</q> indicates that he is a man of rank
and official position, one to whom an author would not venture
to present hasty, imperfect, and inaccurate work, especially
when the one addressed had been instructed already
in reference to the matters related.
</p>

<p>
Thus this preface shows the supreme purpose of Luke
was to confirm the belief of Theophilus, who is apparently
his patron and friend, and to deepen his conviction of the
truth of the gospel story. Surely, such an introduction
must remind every reader that our Christian faith is based
upon an impregnable foundation of historic fact.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>II. The Birth and Childhood of Jesus. Chs. 1:5 to 2:52</head>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>A. The Birth of John Foretold. Chs. 1:5-25</head>

<quote rend="display">
5 There was in the days of Herod, king of Judæa, a certain
priest named Zacharias, of the course of Abijah: and he
had a wife of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was
Elisabeth. 6 And they were both righteous before God,
walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the
Lord blameless. 7 And they had no child, because that
Elisabeth was barren, and they both were <hi rend='italic'>now</hi> well stricken
in years.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
8 Now it came to pass, while he executed the priest's office
before God in the order of his course, 9 according to the custom
of the priest's office, his lot was to enter into the temple
of the Lord and burn incense. 10 And the whole multitude
of the people were praying without at the hour of incense.
11 And there appeared unto him an angel of the Lord standing
on the right side of the altar of incense. 12 And Zacharias
was troubled when he saw <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, and fear fell upon him. 13
But the angel said unto him, Fear not, Zacharias: because
thy supplication is heard, and thy wife Elisabeth shall bear
thee a son, and thou shalt call his name John. 14 And thou
shalt have joy and gladness; and many shall rejoice at his
birth. 15 For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord, and
he shall drink no wine nor strong drink; and he shall be filled
with the Holy Spirit, even from his mother's womb. 16 And
many of the children of Israel shall he turn unto the Lord
their God. 17 And he shall go before his face in the spirit
and power of Elijah, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the
children, and the disobedient <hi rend='italic'>to walk</hi> in the wisdom of the
just; to make ready for the Lord a people prepared <hi rend='italic'>for him</hi>.
18 And Zacharias said unto the angel, Whereby shall I know
this? for I am an old man, and my wife well stricken in years.
19 And the angel answering said unto him, I am Gabriel, that
stand in the presence of God; and I was sent to speak unto
thee, and to bring thee these good tidings. 20 And behold,
thou shalt be silent and not able to speak, until the day that
these things shall come to pass, because thou believedst not
my words, which shall be fulfilled in their season. 21 And
the people were waiting for Zacharias, and they marvelled
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
while he tarried in the temple. 22 And when he came out,
he could not speak unto them: and they perceived that he
had seen a vision in the temple: and he continued making
signs unto them, and remained dumb. 23 And it came to
pass, when the days of his ministration were fulfilled, he
departed unto his house.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
24 And after these days Elisabeth his wife conceived; and
she hid herself five months, saying, 25 Thus hath the Lord
done unto me in the days wherein he looked upon <hi rend='italic'>me</hi>, to
take away my reproach among men.
</quote>

<p>
Luke is the gospel of gladness, of praise, and of prayer,
of tender, human interest, and of heavenly grace. It is
fitting, therefore, that the narrative should open with a
scene in the Temple at the hour of incense and with a divine
promise which fills a heart with rapturous joy. This promise
concerns the birth of one who is to prepare the way for
the ministry of Christ, and this ministry forms the sum and
substance of the gospel story.
</p>

<p>
The time was <q>in the days of Herod,</q> called <q>the Great,</q>
a monster of cruelty, a vassal of Rome, who ruled the Jews
with savage tyranny. The political slavery of the people
was only less pitiful than their spiritual decline, for religion
had become an empty form, a mere system of ceremonies
and rites. However, God is never without his witnesses
and his true worshipers. Among these were <q>a certain
priest named Zacharias</q> and his wife Elisabeth, who lived
in the hill country of Judea, south of Jerusalem. They
<q>were both righteous before God,</q> not sinless but without
reproach, carefully observing the moral and also the ritual
requirements of the law. Yet godliness is no guarantee
against sorrow or against the disappointment of human
hopes, and these pious souls were saddened because their
home was childless. This trial was peculiarly great among
a people who regarded childlessness as a sign of divine displeasure
and it was even more distressing to the hearts of
the faithful who were yearning for the birth of the promised
Messiah.
</p>

<p>
Twice each year Zacharias went to Jerusalem to perform
for a week his sacred tasks. Finally there came to him a
privilege which a priest could enjoy only once in his lifetime;
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
the <q>lot</q> fell upon him, and he thus was chosen to
enter the Holy Place at the hour of prayer and there offer
incense upon the golden altar just before the veil in the very
presence of God. It was the supreme hour of his life. As
the cloud of perfume began to rise, true symbol of accepted
petitions, an angel appeared and assured the startled priest
that his supplications had been heard. For what had
Zacharias then been praying&mdash;for a son, or for the salvation
of his people? Were not both desires included in that supplication?
As the representative of a nation, the priest
hardly could have confined his petition to what was purely
personal and private. Yet, as he pleaded for the coming of
the Messiah, there must have been in his soul the secret
yearning of the long years or the memory of that abandoned
hope which he had always associated in thought with the
salvation of Israel. Many a minister of Christ has a
similar experience; in the very performance of his public
tasks there rests on his soul the conscious shadow of some
private grief.
</p>

<p>
The angel declared that the prayer for national salvation
had been heard, and he gradually unfolded the contents
of the divine answer; the Messiah was about to appear,
and his coming was to be heralded by a son who was
to be born to the aged priest. The angel spoke with great
definiteness: the child would be named John; many would
rejoice at his birth; he would be a Nazirite, and as such
would take the vow of total abstinence from wine and of
complete dedication to God; as a consequence of this dedication
he would be filled with the divine Spirit and thus
enabled to lead his people to repentance. He would labor
in the spirit and power of Elijah, calling men to lives of natural
affection and justice and preparing them for the salvation
which Christ would bring.
</p>

<p>
So surprising a message was too great to be credited at
once by the wondering priest. He had ceased to hope that
the longing of his heart could be fulfilled. He therefore
asked for a sign by which he might be assured that the
blessed promise was true. The angel replied with a statement
of his own majestic power and the glory of his mission
and he granted to Zacharias a sign. This sign was at once
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
a rebuke and a blessing. It rebuked the unbelief of the
aged priest, yet it strengthened his faith. He was smitten
with dumbness which was to continue until the promise
of the angel had been realized. Zacharias would not accept
the word of the Lord; he would not praise him for his
goodness and his grace. Therefore, his tongue was to be
silent and he was to be unable to speak until at last his lips
were opened in glad thanksgiving. Unbelief is never joyous;
infidelity has no songs.
</p>

<p>
However, the sign suggests supernatural power. The
faith of Zacharias and also of Elisabeth will be strengthened
by the very silence in their home. So when the people in
the court of the Temple waited for the priest to reappear,
when as he came they still waited for the usual benediction,
when they found that Zacharias had been stricken with
dumbness, they concluded he had seen a vision in the Temple,
and he himself was assured that the messenger had
come from God. In due time the promise was fulfilled; a
new life came into being. Meanwhile, until it would be
evident that her <q>reproach</q> for childlessness had been
taken away, Elisabeth lived in strict retirement. She
would not have others, by seeing her, think that she was
under divine displeasure at the very time when she secretly
knew that she was a special recipient of divine grace. She
was jealous for the glory of her God; she delighted in her
hidden fellowship with him. From the homes of such
priests who can pray, and of such hearts which can trust,
there ever have been coming the great prophets of the
Lord.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>B. The Annunciation To Mary. Ch. 1:26-38</head>

<quote rend="display">
26 Now in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from
God unto a city of Galilee, named Nazareth, 27 to a virgin
betrothed to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of
David; and the virgin's name was Mary. 28 And he came in
unto her, and said, Hail, thou that art highly favored, the
Lord <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> with thee. 29 But she was greatly troubled at the
saying, and cast in her mind what manner of salutation this
might be. 30 And the angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary:
for thou hast found favor with God. 31 And behold, thou
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shalt
call his name JESUS. 32 He shall be great, and shall be called
the Son of the Most High: and the Lord God shall give unto
him the throne of his father David: 33 and he shall reign over
the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shall
be no end. 34 And Mary said unto the angel, How shall this
be, seeing I know not a man? 35 And the angel answered
and said unto her, The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and
the power of the Most High shall overshadow thee: wherefore
also the holy thing which is begotten shall be called the Son
of God. 36 And behold, Elisabeth thy kinswoman, she also
hath conceived a son in her old age; and this is the sixth
month with her that was called barren. 37 For no word
from God shall be void of power. 38 And Mary said, Behold,
the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy
word. And the angel departed from her.
</quote>

<p>
The prediction to Mary of the birth of Jesus is recorded
by Luke with marked dignity, delicacy, and reserve. It is
an important record. This prediction is the crown of all
prophecy and it reveals the supreme mystery of the Christian
faith, namely, the nature of our Lord, at once human
and divine.
</p>

<p>
The same angelic being who had spoken to Zacharias
speaks again, not now to an aged and distinguished priest
amidst the splendors of the Temple in Jerusalem, but to a
humble maiden betrothed to a carpenter in an obscure village
of Galilee. The angelic salutation, <q>Hail, thou that
art highly favored,</q> has been translated less accurately,
<q>Hail, thou that art full of grace,</q> and it has been misinterpreted
to encourage the practice of praying to the virgin
as divine. It does not mean, however, that Mary was to
be a source but rather a recipient of grace; upon her God
was bestowing peculiar favor. She may rightly be regarded
as the most blessed among women; but only a
woman still.
</p>

<p>
Mary had been startled by so strange an appearance and
greeting; now she was further amazed by the announcement,
<q>Thou shalt ... bring forth a son, and shalt call his
name Jesus.</q> Before her marriage she was to become a
mother, and she was to call her child by that significant
name which signifies <q>Saviour</q> or <q>God is Saviour.</q> <q>He
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
shall be great,</q> continued the angel, both in his person, as
<q>the Son of the Most High,</q> and in his royal power, for <q>the
Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David.</q>
This throne of David does not refer to the Christian
Church or to merely heavenly or spiritual influence. It is
a rule on earth which here is promised, yet it is not to be
limited to one nation nor is it to be confined to one age. It
is the Kingdom of the Messiah, which is to bring joy to <q>the
house of Jacob for ever</q> and also to all the nations of the
world&mdash;<q>and of his kingdom there shall be no end.</q>
</p>

<p>
The exclamation of Mary expressed astonishment but
not unbelief: <q>How shall this be?</q> Then came the answer
which is unsurpassed as a clear and sublime statement of
the incarnation, <q>The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee,
and the power of the Most High shall overshadow thee;</q>
the creative power of God was to rest upon Mary as the
cloud of glory had rested upon the tabernacle of Israel and
as a result the child who would be born should be in reality,
and should be called, <q>the Son of God.</q> Of the truth of
his promise the angel added a sign and proof in the surprising
fact that Elisabeth, the aged kinswoman of Mary,
was soon to be blessed with a son. This was in fulfillment
of a promise made by the same angel messenger, and the
marvel in the case of Elisabeth would assure Mary of the
certain accomplishment of the gracious and more surprising
promise to her. The reply of Mary is probably unequaled
in all history as an expression of perfect faith, <q>Behold
the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy
word.</q> Thus she revealed belief in the word of God and
submission to the will of God. There was no doubt in her
mind as to the truth of the divine promise with all that it
suggested of miracle and of mystery; and there was no
shrinking on her part from all that the fulfillment of this
promise possibly might involve of suspicion and shame and
reproach and suffering and even death. Those who believe
most firmly in the promises of God, submit most patiently
to his providences; they see the glory which surely
will succeed the gloom. Mary was to become the mother
of the Messiah, of the Son of Man, of the Saviour of the
world.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>C. The <q>Magnificat.</q> Ch. 1:39-56</head>

<quote rend="display">
39 And Mary arose in these days and went into the hill
country with haste, into a city of Judah; 40 and entered into
the house of Zacharias and saluted Elisabeth. 41 And it came
to pass, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the
babe leaped in her womb; and Elisabeth was filled with the
Holy Spirit; 42 and she lifted up her voice with a loud cry,
and said, Blessed <hi rend='italic'>art</hi> thou among women, and blessed is the
fruit of thy womb. 43 And whence is this to me, that the
mother of my Lord should come unto me?
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
44 For behold, when the voice of thy salutation came into
mine ears, the babe leaped in my womb for joy. 45 And
blessed is she that believeth; for there shall be a fulfilment
of the things which have been spoken to her from the Lord.
46 And Mary said,
<lg>
<l>My soul doth magnify the Lord,</l>
<l>47 And my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour.</l>
<l>48 For he hath looked upon the low estate of his handmaid:</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">For behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me
blessed.</l>
<l>49 For he that is mighty hath done to me great things;</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">And holy is his name.</l>
<l>50 And his mercy is unto generations and generations</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">On them that fear him.</l>
<l>51 He hath showed strength with his arm;</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">He hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their
heart.</l>
<l>52 He hath put down princes from <hi rend='italic'>their</hi> thrones,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">And hath exalted them of low degree.</l>
<l>53 The hungry he hath filled with good things;</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">And the rich he hath sent empty away.</l>
<l>54 He hath given help to Israel his servant,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">That he might remember mercy</l>
<l>55 (As he spake unto our fathers)</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Toward Abraham and his seed for ever.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
56 And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned
unto her house.
</quote>

<p>
The Magnificat, the lovely lyric which comes from the
lips of Mary, has been sung during many centuries as one of
the chief canticles of the Christian Church. Its occasion
was a visit paid to her kinswoman, Elisabeth, by Mary
shortly after she had received the promise of the birth
of a son. Elisabeth on hearing the salutation of Mary
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
addressed her in high spiritual ecstasy, declaring her supremely
blessed among women because of the Son to be
born, and wondering at her own honor in being thus visited
by the mother of her Lord, by which phrase she means
the mother of the Messiah; it is to be noted that the Bible
does not contain the phrase <q>Mother of God.</q> Elisabeth
congratulated Mary upon her faith and assured her that
the promise upon which Mary relied was certain to be
fulfilled.
</p>

<p>
The name of the song which Mary then sang, the Magnificat,
has come from the first line in its Latin form,
<hi rend='italic'>Magnificat anima mea Dominum</hi>. The model is that of
the ancient hymn sung by Hannah when her heart, like
that of Mary, was rejoicing in the promised gift of a son.
The verses form a perfect mosaic of Old Testament quotations.
The hymn was not addressed to Elisabeth or to
the Lord; it is rather a meditation upon the mercy and
grace of God.
</p>

<p>
According to the common division the song is composed
of four stanzas of four lines each, except the third stanza
which contains six lines. The general movement of
thought seems to be from the goodness of God to Mary
as an individual, to his consequent kindness to Israel as
a nation.
</p>

<p>
The first stanza, or strophe, vs. 46-48, illustrates, as do
those which follow, one of the chief features of Hebrew
poetry, namely, the expression, in successive lines, of
thoughts which are parallel or closely related. In her
<q>soul</q> or <q>spirit</q> or innermost being, Mary praises or
magnifies the Lord and rejoices in him as her Saviour. This
salvation is not only for her people, but particularly for
herself; it is not only political but also spiritual. It is to be
wrought out by the gift God is granting to Mary. He has
chosen her, an obscure village maiden betrothed to a poor
carpenter, and has bestowed upon her such honor that all
future generations will call her <q>blessed.</q> While realizing
the honor she dwells most upon her unworthiness while
recognizing what it may cost her, she declares her submission
as a true <q>bondmaid</q> or slave of the Lord. Humility
and faith could hardly be more sublime.
</p>

<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>

<p>
The second stanza, vs. 49, 50, centers the thought upon
the character of God as revealed in his gracious gift. His
power, his holiness, his mercy are praised. In his goodness
to Mary he had shown his divine power, yet in accordance
with the moral perfection of his revealed nature and in
order to bring blessings to countless generations who would
trust and reverence him.
</p>

<p>
In the third stanza, vs. 51-53, is an illustration of another
feature of Hebrew poetry; not only is there striking parallelism,
but here past tenses are used to describe future events;
the results of the coming of the Messiah are stated as
though already achieved. In contrast with the blessedness
of those that fear the Lord, <q>the proud,</q> the rebellious,
and unbelieving are pictured as <q>scattered</q> like the hosts
of a defeated army; the oppressed are exalted while tyrants
are dethroned; the hungry are filled and the rich are sent
away <q>empty.</q> These results are to be regarded as spiritual
as well as physical. Such reversals are certain to occur
where Christ is accepted and those who receive blessings
from him are the humble who are conscious of their need.
</p>

<p>
The last strophe, vs. 54, 55, emphasizes the faithfulness
of God to his ancient promises which Mary sees fulfilled in
the birth of her Son. In this saving help given to Israel,
God is showing that he has not forgotten the mercy <q>toward
Abraham and his seed</q> promised to the <q>fathers</q> of
old. Only in Christ Jesus can be realized all the promises
to Israel, all the hopes of the ages.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>D. The Birth of John, and the <q>Benedictus.</q> Ch. 1:57-80</head>

<quote rend="display">
57 Now Elisabeth's time was fulfilled that she should be
delivered; and she brought forth a son. 58 And her neighbors
and her kinsfolk heard that the Lord had magnified his
mercy towards her; and they rejoiced with her. 59 And it
came to pass on the eighth day, that they came to circumcise
the child; and they would have called him Zacharias, after
the name of his father. 60 And his mother answered and
said, Not so; but he shall be called John. 61 And they said
unto her, There is none of thy kindred that is called by this
name. 62 And they made signs to his father, what he would
have him called. 63 And he asked for a writing tablet, and
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
wrote, saying, His name is John. And they marvelled all.
64 And his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue
<hi rend='italic'>loosed</hi>, and he spake, blessing God. 65 And fear came on all
that dwelt round about them: and all these sayings were
noised abroad throughout all the hill country of Judæa. 66
And all that heard them laid them up in their heart, saying,
What then shall this child be? For the hand of the Lord
was with him.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
67 And his father Zacharias was filled with the Holy
Spirit, and prophesied, saying,
<lg>
<l>68 Blessed <hi rend='italic'>be</hi> the Lord, the God of Israel;</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">For he hath visited and wrought redemption for his people,</l>
<l>69 And hath raised up a horn of salvation for us</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">In the house of his servant David</l>
<l>70 (As he spake by the mouth of his holy prophets that have
been from of old),</l>
<l>71 Salvation from our enemies, and from the hand of all
that hate us;</l>
<l>72 To show mercy towards our fathers,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">And to remember his holy covenant;</l>
<l>73 The oath which he sware unto Abraham our father,</l>
<l>74 To grant unto us that we being delivered out of the hand
of our enemies</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Should serve him without fear,</l>
<l>75 In holiness and righteousness before him all our days.</l>
<l>76 Yea and thou, child, shalt be called the prophet of the
Most High:</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">For thou shalt go before the face of the Lord to make
ready his ways;</l>
<l>77 To give knowledge of salvation unto his people</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">In the remission of their sins,</l>
<l>78 Because of the tender mercy of our God,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Whereby the dayspring from on high shall visit us,</l>
<l>79 To shine upon them that sit in darkness and the shadow
of death;</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">To guide our feet into the way of peace.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
80 And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and
was in the deserts till the day of his showing unto Israel.
</quote>

<p>
When the aged priest, Zacharias, had received from an
angel the promise that he was to be given a son who would
be called John and who would be the herald of Christ, and
when he had asked for a sign to attest the truth of the prediction,
he was smitten with dumbness as a rebuke for his
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
unbelief and as a stimulus for his faith. Even when at last
the promise was fulfilled, the sign was not removed and he
was not able to speak until he had given a written expression
of his confidence in God. This interesting incident
occurred on the eighth day after the birth of John, when in
the presence of their rejoicing friends the parents were
about to name the child. Many supposed that the name
of the father would be selected. The mother, however,
intimated that the name might be <q>John.</q> When Zacharias,
the father, was consulted, <q>he asked for a writing
tablet, and wrote, ... His name is John.</q> There was no
hesitation, no uncertainty, no question in his mind, for this
name had been predicted by the angel, and Zacharias
showed by his decision and firmness that he believed absolutely
in the fulfillment of all that the angel had promised
concerning the career of the son who was to be regarded by
his fellow men as a gift of divine grace and a prophet of divine
appointment. It usually happens that a public confession
of faith results in new joy and in wider testimony. It
was surely so in the case of Zacharias: <q>His mouth was
opened immediately, ... and he spake, blessing God.</q>
His thanksgiving was voiced in a hymn which, for hundreds
of years, has been sung daily in Christian worship. It is
indeed a Christian hymn and a hymn of the nativity; for
while its occasion was the birth of John, only one stanza
refers to that event; the whole burden of the thanksgiving
refers to the approaching birth of Jesus and to the salvation
which he is to bring.
</p>

<p>
This hymn is named the Benedictus from the first word
in the Latin version. It is an ecstatic expression of gratitude
to God for his boundless goodness. The poem possibly
may be divided into five stanzas of four lines each; but
there is a definite pause after the third of these stanzas
when the thought turns from the work of Christ to the
specific mission of John.
</p>

<p>
The first strophe, vs. 68, 69, speaks of the redemption of
Israel as already accomplished in the gift of the Christ who
is about to be born and who is described as <q>a horn of salvation,</q>
that is, a manifestation of saving power. He is to
appear as a son and heir of David the king.
</p>

<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>

<p>
The second stanza, or strophe, vs. 70-72, indicates that
the salvation from all enemies is in fulfillment of the promises
made through the prophets and cherished by the ancient
fathers and embodied in the holy covenant made with
Israel of old.
</p>

<p>
The third stanza, vs. 73-75, describes the nature of this
salvation which was assured by the oath to Abraham; it is
to be such a deliverance from political oppression as to
make possible for Israel a true, priestly service of God, as a
nation holy and righteous before him.
</p>

<p>
In the fourth stanza, vs. 76, 77, the singer turns to address
his own son whose birth has given occasion to the
song. He declares that John is to be recognized as a
prophet of God whose divine mission will be to announce
and to define the promised salvation as in its essence not a
political but a spiritual redemption consisting in the remission
of sin. John was not to be a revolutionist but a
reformer. He was to call a nation to repentance that those
who obeyed his message might be ready to receive the salvation
of Christ.
</p>

<p>
This mission of John is linked with that of Christ as the
description of the latter reaches its climax in the closing
strophe. Vs. 78, 79. The source of all the blessings Christ
will bring is found in <q>the tender mercy of our God;</q> the essence
is a visitation of <q>the dayspring from on high,</q> when
the Sun of righteousness arises upon the helpless, terrified
wanderers of the night who are seated <q>in darkness and the
shadow of death;</q> the result will be <q>to guide our feet into
the way of peace.</q>
</p>

<p>
Such is the hymn of Zacharias, a hymn of faith, of hope,
of gratitude, a song of the salvation provided by the love
of God in Jesus Christ our Lord.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>E. The Birth of Jesus. Ch. 2:1-20</head>

<quote rend="display">
1 Now it came to pass in those days, there went out a decree
from Cæsar Augustus, that all the world should be enrolled.
2 This was the first enrolment made when Quirinius
was governor of Syria. 3 And all went to enrol themselves,
every one to his own city. 4 And Joseph also went up from
Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judæa, to the city
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
of David, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the
house and family of David; 5 to enrol himself with Mary,
who was betrothed to him, being great with child. 6 And it
came to pass, while they were there, the days were fulfilled
that she should be delivered. 7 And she brought forth her
firstborn son; and she wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and
laid him in a manger, because there was no room for them
in the inn.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
8 And there were shepherds in the same country abiding
in the field, and keeping watch by night over their flock. 9
And an angel of the Lord stood by them, and the glory of the
Lord shone round about them: and they were sore afraid.
10 And the angel said unto them, Be not afraid; for behold,
I bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be to all the
people: 11 for there is born to you this day in the city of
David a Saviour, who is Christ the Lord. 12 And this is the
sign unto you: Ye shall find a babe wrapped in swaddling
clothes, and lying in a manger. 13 And suddenly there was
with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God,
and saying,
<lg>
<l>14 Glory to God in the highest,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">And on earth peace among men in whom he is well pleased.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
15 And it came to pass, when the angels went away from
them into heaven, the shepherds said one to another, Let us
now go even unto Bethlehem, and see this thing that is come
to pass, which the Lord hath made known unto us. 16 And
they came with haste, and found both Mary and Joseph, and
the babe lying in the manger. 17 And when they saw it,
they made known concerning the saying which was spoken
to them about this child. 18 And all that heard it wondered
at the things which were spoken unto them by the shepherds.
19 But Mary kept all these sayings, pondering them in her
heart. 20 And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising
God for all the things that they had heard and seen, even
as it was spoken unto them.
</quote>

<p>
The story of the birth of Jesus as related by Matthew is
in striking contrast with that of Luke. Matthew depicts
Jesus as a King and at his birth the reigning Herod trembles
on his throne and the Magi adore him, offering regal
gifts. Luke represents Jesus as the ideal Man, and the
story is full of human interest. It describes two obscure
peasants journeying from their northern home in Nazareth
to Bethlehem and there, excluded from the inn, placing in
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
a manger their newborn babe, while the first to visit them
are humble shepherds from the neighboring plain. Human
interests, however, are not merely earthly interests; the
story is vocal with heavenly melodies and inwoven with
messages of divine meaning and grace.
</p>

<p>
Only the most recent scholarship has vindicated the historic
accuracy of Luke in connecting the event with the
decree of Augustus and with the enrollment under Quirinius.
However, these facts are mentioned by Luke not so
much to fix the date of the birth of Christ as to explain how
this occurred in Bethlehem when the home of his parents
was in Nazareth. Only a legal necessity would have made
them willing to take such a journey at such a time, but
thus it appears that the emperor of the world was concerned
unconsciously in the fulfillment of divine prophecy
concerning the Saviour of the world. According to the
imperial decree, Joseph left Nazareth and with Mary, to
whom according to Matthew he was not only <q>betrothed</q>
but married, journeyed to Bethlehem, five miles south of
Jerusalem, to be enrolled in his ancestral city. There is
born their promised Son. Their exclusion from the inn
was not due to any lack of hospitality; much less did it express
hostility to Jesus; it was due simply to the crowded
condition of the town. However, it is suggestive of the
obscurity and discomfort and poverty of Joseph and Mary.
</p>

<p>
In view of his evident appreciation of the supreme importance
of the birth of Jesus, the account of Luke is almost
startling in its brevity and simplicity. However, with consummate
art, after his own short statement of fact, he allows
divine messengers to give the interpretation and to
express the significance of the event. These messengers
were angels. They appeared to a group of shepherds who
were <q>abiding in the field, and keeping watch by night over
their flock.</q> Out of a blaze of heavenly glory came the
tidings of great joy to Israel, <q>There is born to you this day
in the city of David a Saviour, who is Christ the Lord.</q>
The angel did not then disclose the larger truth, that this
Christ was to be the redeemer of all men or that he was a
divine Lord. However, a sign was given whereby the shepherds
might be able to distinguish the child and to be
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
assured that he was the Christ: <q>Ye shall find a babe
wrapped in swaddling clothes, and lying in a manger.</q> A
strange sign it was; yet for us it has become a symbol full of
meaning; a Redeemer who was cradled in a manger has
known what it is to endure poverty and suffering and
neglect, and now he can sympathize with the lowly and
distressed even as he is abundantly able to save.
</p>

<p>
When the good news had been given, there suddenly
swelled forth an angel chorus, singing that great hymn of
the nativity which, as subsequently expanded by Christian
worshipers, is named from its Latin version, the
Gloria in Excelsis. As sung by the angels it is composed
of two verses, each containing three corresponding notes,
<q>glory</q> and <q>peace,</q> <q>in the highest</q> (heaven) and <q>on
earth,</q> <q>God,</q> and <q>men.</q> This is a hymn of praise to
God who in the gift of a Saviour manifests in heaven his
excellence and on earth reveals his grace to men, the recipients
of his favor. The result of this, however, is declared
to be <q>peace;</q> in Christ alone can peace be secured&mdash;peace
with God, peace for the human heart, peace between men,
peace for the world.
</p>

<p>
The astonished shepherds hastened to verify the good
news and they became in a real sense the first witnesses for
Christ as <q>they made known concerning the saying which
was spoken to them about this child.</q> It is not strange
that all who heard wondered, or that Mary treasured in her
heart the heavenly messages, or that the shepherds returned
to their tasks with gratitude and praise, for there
lingered in their memories a song which expresses still the
hope of all mankind.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>F. The Presentation of Jesus, and the <q>Nunc Dimittis.</q> Ch. 2:21-40</head>

<quote rend="display">
21 And when eight days were fulfilled for circumcising
him, his name was called JESUS, who was so called by the
angel before he was conceived in the womb.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
22 And when the days of their purification according to
the law of Moses were fulfilled, they brought him up to
Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord 23 (as it is written in
the law of the Lord, Every male that openeth the womb shall
be called holy to the Lord), 24 and to offer a sacrifice according
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
to that which is said in the law of the Lord, A pair of
turtledoves, or two young pigeons. 25 And behold, there
was a man in Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon; and this
man was righteous and devout, looking for the consolation
of Israel: and the Holy Spirit was upon him. 26 And it had
been revealed unto him by the Holy Spirit, that he should
not see death, before he had seen the Lord's Christ. 27 And
he came in the Spirit into the temple and when the parents
brought in the child Jesus, that they might do concerning
him after the custom of the law, 28 then he received him into
his arms, and blessed God, and said,
<lg>
<l>29 Now lettest thou thy servant depart, O Lord,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">According to thy word, in peace;</l>
<l>30 For mine eyes have seen thy salvation,</l>
<l>31 Which thou hast prepared before the face of all peoples;</l>
<l>32 A light for revelation to the Gentiles,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">And the glory of thy people Israel.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
33 And his father and his mother were marvelling at the
things which were spoken concerning him; 34 and Simeon
blessed them, and said unto Mary his mother, Behold, this
<hi rend='italic'>child</hi> is set for the falling and the rising of many in Israel;
and for a sign which is spoken against; 35 yea and a sword
shall pierce through thine own soul; that thoughts out of
many hearts may be revealed. 36 And there was one Anna,
a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher
(she was of a great age, having lived with a husband seven
years from her virginity, 37 and she had been a widow even
unto fourscore and four years), who departed not from the
temple, worshipping with fastings and supplications night and
day. 38 And coming up at that very hour she gave thanks
unto God, and spake of him to all them that were looking for
the redemption of Jerusalem. 39 And when they had accomplished
all things that were according to the law of the Lord,
they returned into Galilee, to their own city Nazareth.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
40 And the child grew, and waxed strong, filled with wisdom:
and the grace of God was upon him.
</quote>

<p>
The incidents of the infancy of Jesus recorded by Luke
not only add human interest to the story but they interpret
the future career and the saving work of our Lord. Thus
when on the eighth day he was named <q>Jesus,</q> a name
often given to Jewish boys, it was because he was destined
to fulfill all that the name implies, for he was to be the
<q>Salvation of the Lord.</q>
</p>

<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>

<p>
So, too, when five weeks later he was presented in the
Temple, when his mother offered for herself a sacrifice
which indicated lack of wealth but not abject poverty, the
real significance of the scene is set forth in the prophetic
utterances of the saintly Simeon and Anna. The first of
these utterances was the song of Simeon, called from the
Latin form of its opening words the Nunc Dimittis (<q>Now
Lettest Thou Depart</q>). To this devout soul it had been
revealed that he should not die until he had seen the Messiah,
<q>the Lord's Christ.</q> Led by the Spirit to the Temple
while the parents of Jesus are there presenting their Son
before the Lord, he took the little babe in his arms and
sang the sweetest and most solemn song of the nativity,
which, unlike the Magnificat or the Benedictus, promises
redemption not only to Israel but to all the world.
</p>

<p>
<q>Now lettest thou thy servant depart ... in peace;</q>
the figure of speech is full of beauty; it is the word of a
faithful watchman who welcomes with joy the hour of his
dismissal, for he has caught the vision of the coming One;
now he is about to be sent away in the peace of an accomplished
task, in the peace of fulfilled hope; for his eyes have
seen the Saviour according to the promise of the Lord. The
redemption which the Messiah brings, as the song continues
to declare, is for all peoples; it is a light to reveal the way
of salvation to the Gentiles; it is to be the true glory of the
favored people, Israel.
</p>

<p>
While this salvation is provided for all, it will not be accepted
by all. To the wondering mother, Simeon uttered
a dark word of prophecy. The ministry of Jesus will be the
occasion for the fall and the rise of many. Their attitude
toward him will be a revelation of character; some will
reject him and thus condemn themselves; some will speak
against him, even though he is the very token and instrument
of divine salvation; this opposition will reach its climax
at the cross, when bitter anguish like a sword will
pierce the soul of Mary. Jesus is to be the touchstone of
character; wherever he is known, by accepting or by rejecting
him, men will disclose their true nature; <q>the
thoughts out of many hearts</q> will be <q>revealed.</q>
</p>

<p>
While Mary and Joseph were still wondering at these
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
sublime words there appeared an aged prophetess whose
long years of widowhood had been spent in continual worship;
she, too, praised God for the salvation to be accomplished
by the Child of Mary and she went forth to speak of
him to all who like her <q>were looking for the redemption of
Jerusalem.</q>
</p>

<p>
Mary and Joseph, however, returned to their home in
Nazareth where Jesus was to spend his infancy and early
childhood. During those years of obscurity his development
was normal, but unique in its symmetry and its perfection;
he <q>grew, and waxed strong</q> in body, but there
was just as true a growth in mind and spirit; he was <q>filled
with wisdom: and the grace of God was upon him.</q> The
Saviour of the world was to be the ideal Man.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>G. The Boy Jesus At Jerusalem. Ch. 2:41-52</head>

<quote rend="display">
41 And his parents went every year to Jerusalem at the
feast of the passover. 42 And when he was twelve years old,
they went up after the custom of the feast; 43 and when they
had fulfilled the days, as they were returning, the boy Jesus
tarried behind in Jerusalem; and his parents knew it not;
44 but supposing him to be in the company, they went a day's
journey; and they sought for him among their kinsfolk and
acquaintance; 45 and when they found him not, they returned
to Jerusalem, seeking for him. 46 And it came to pass, after
three days they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst
of the teachers, both hearing them, and asking them questions:
47 and all that heard him were amazed at his understanding
and his answers. 48 And when they saw him, they were
astonished; and his mother said unto him, Son, why hast
thou thus dealt with us? behold, thy father and I sought thee
sorrowing. 49 And he said unto them, How is it that ye
sought me? knew ye not that I must be in my Father's house?
50 And they understood not the saying which he spake unto
them. 51 And he went down with them, and came to Nazareth;
and he was subject unto them; and his mother kept all
<hi rend='italic'>these</hi> sayings in her heart.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
52 And Jesus advanced in wisdom and stature, and in
favor with God and men.
</quote>

<p>
It has been said that the boyhood of Jesus is like a walled
garden from which we have been given but a single flower,
but this is so fragrant as to fill our hearts with a longing to
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
enter within the secret inclosure. We have but a single
incident of his boyhood days; it is recorded for us only by
Luke, a visit to Jerusalem paid by Jesus when he was
twelve years old. At about this age a young Jew became a
<q>son of the law</q> and began to observe its requirements,
among which were the pilgrimages to the holy city to observe
the sacred feasts. On this first visit to Jerusalem,
Jesus was unintentionally left behind by his parents as they
started on their return journey to Nazareth. At the end
of the first day they failed to find him in the long caravan
which was moving northward toward Galilee. The day
following, Mary and Joseph returned to Jerusalem, and on
the third day they discovered Jesus in the Temple in the
midst of the teachers who were surprised at his knowledge
of the sacred Scriptures. There was an implied rebuke in
the words of Mary, <q>Son, why hast thou thus dealt with us?
behold, thy father and I sought thee sorrowing?</q> In the
reply of Jesus there was something of surprise and also of
reproof, yet there were deep undertones of love, of spiritual
vision, and of solemn resolve: <q>How is it that ye sought
me? knew ye not that I must be in my Father's house?</q>
</p>

<p>
These are the first recorded words of Jesus and they are
an index and an explanation of his entire career; for their
preservation this story was recorded by Luke. If they contained
a rebuke for Mary, it must have been conveyed in
accents of reverence and affection; and was there not involved
a delicate compliment? Jesus does not reprove his
parents for seeking him, but for not seeking him in the
Temple first of all; and does he not seem to have implied
that his parents had taught him to love the house of God
and to delight in the law of God? He was saying in effect:
<q>Why thus did you seek me? Why did you not remember
that the Temple is the very place where I should be found?</q>
</p>

<p>
These words are thus a revelation of the life in the home
at Nazareth. It was not by a miracle or due to some divine
attribute, but because of the training he had received
from his pious parents, that Jesus at the age of twelve was
a master of the Scriptures, and had learned to reverence and
adore all that was related to them and to the worship of
God. Is it not possible for parents to-day to awaken in the
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
hearts of their children a love for the house and the Word
and the will of God?
</p>

<p>
These words, further, were a revelation of the consciousness
of divine sonship. Jesus already realized that in a
unique sense God was his own Father, the true source of his
being. He instantly corrected the words of Mary, <q>thy
father,</q> which referred to Joseph, with his own words <q>my
Father,</q> which referred to God. Luke depicts Jesus as the
ideal Man, but always as one conscious that he was the
Son of God.
</p>

<p>
Our children should learn to regard God as their Father,
not in the unique sense employed by Jesus as the eternal
Son, nor yet in the sense which can apply to all created
beings, but as denoting that intimate relationship with God
made possible for believers through Jesus Christ our Lord.
</p>

<p>
Most important of all, these words are the revelation of a
firm resolve, of a great molding purpose; Jesus perceived
that it was his duty to be in the house of his Father&mdash;not
merely in the literal Temple, but in the sphere of life and
activity of which the Temple was the great expression and
symbol and sign. He had determined, that is, to devote all
his thoughts and energies and powers to the definite service
of God. At the age of twelve are not most children sufficiently
mature to form a somewhat similar purpose and to
recognize in the service of God the supreme and comprehensive
duty of every life?
</p>

<p>
With this definite ideal in mind Jesus returned to Nazareth
and continued to live in submission to his parents,
toiling for eighteen years as a carpenter and in the quiet
retirement of an obscure village receiving a training for his
public career which would have been impossible amidst the
formalism and the distractions of Jerusalem. His development
was as natural as it was perfect; he <q>advanced in
wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and men;</q> his
bodily and mental growth were no more marked than his
increasing charm and spiritual power. Such development
is possible in the humblest sphere for those whose lives are
yielded to the will of God.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>III. The Preparation. Chs. 3:1 to 4:13</head>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>A. The Preaching Of John. Ch. 3:1-20</head>

<quote rend="display">
1 Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Cæsar,
Pontius Pilate being governor of Judæa, and Herod being
tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip tetrarch of the region
of Ituræa and Trachonitis, and Lysanias tetrarch of
Abilene, 2 in the high priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas, the
word of God came unto John the son of Zacharias in the
wilderness. 3 And he came into all the region round about
the Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance unto remission
of sins; 4 as it is written in the book of the words of
Isaiah the prophet,
<lg>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">The voice of one crying in the wilderness,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Make ye ready the way of the Lord,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Make his paths straight.</l>
<l>5 Every valley shall be filled,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">And every mountain and hill shall be brought low;</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">And the crooked shall become straight,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">And the rough ways smooth;</l>
<l>6 And all flesh shall see the salvation of God.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
7 He said therefore to the multitudes that went out to be
baptized of him, Ye offspring of vipers, who warned you to
flee from the wrath to come? 8 Bring forth therefore fruits
worthy of repentance, and begin not to say within yourselves,
We have Abraham to our father: for I say unto you, that God
is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham.
9 And even now the axe also lieth at the root of the trees:
every tree therefore that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn
down, and cast into the fire. 10 And the multitudes asked
him, saying, What then must we do? 11 And he answered
and said unto them, He that hath two coats, let him impart
to him that hath none; and he that hath food, let him do likewise.
12 And there came also publicans to be baptized, and
they said unto him, Teacher, what must we do? 13 And he
said unto them, Extort no more than that which is appointed
you. 14 And soldiers also asked him, saying, And we, what
must we do? And he said unto them, Extort from no man by
violence, neither accuse <hi rend='italic'>any one</hi> wrongfully; and be content
with your wages.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
15 And as the people were in expectation, and all
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
men reasoned in their hearts concerning John, whether
haply he were the Christ; 16 John answered, saying unto
them all, I indeed baptize you with water; but there cometh
he that is mightier than I, the latchet of whose shoes I am
not worthy to unloose: he shall baptize you in the Holy
Spirit and <hi rend='italic'>in</hi> fire: 17 whose fan is in his hand, thoroughly to
cleanse his threshing-floor, and to gather the wheat into his
garner; but the chaff he will burn up with unquenchable fire.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
18 With many other exhortations therefore preached he
good tidings unto the people; 19 but Herod the tetrarch, being
reproved by him for Herodias his brother's wife, and for all
the evil things which Herod had done, 20 added this also to
them all, that he shut up John in prison.
</quote>

<p>
John the Baptist was the first inspired prophet to break
the silence of the centuries which had elapsed since the days
of Malachi. The importance of his ministry is indicated
by Luke in the minute exactness with which he fixes its
date. By naming the civil and religious rulers he gives a
sixfold designation of the time; then, too, it accords with
the universal aspect of his Gospel, and with the genius of
Luke as a historian, to link his story with secular events.
Naturally he mentions first the reigning emperor, Tiberius
Cæsar; he next names Pilate, the governor of Judea who
attained an immortality of shame for condemning Jesus to
the cross; Herod Antipas, a seducer and murderer, son of
Herod the Great, is designated as ruler of Galilee; Philip
and Lysanias are said to be governing neighboring provinces;
as ecclesiastical rulers, Annas and Caiaphas are mentioned;
while the former had been deposed some years before,
he continued to share with his son-in-law the actual
duties of the high priesthood, and he also shared the infamy
in which their names are united. Such a list of leading
spirits indicates the absolute moral and religious degeneracy
of the times and the need of some one to call Israel
back to the service and worship of God.
</p>

<p>
Such a messenger appeared in the person of John the
Baptist who after his long discipline in the wilderness came
with a definite message from God and drew out great
throngs to the Jordan Valley to attend his preaching and to
accept his baptism as a sign and seal of their repentance.
The nature of his ministry is declared to have been a fulfillment
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
of the prediction of Isaiah who described <q>one crying
in the wilderness,</q> one sent of God to prepare the way for
the coming of Christ. This preparation is pictured in
terms of Oriental imagery. When a monarch was about to
make a journey, a servant was sent before him to prepare
the highway. Valleys needed to be filled, hills lowered,
crooked places made straight, rough ways made smooth.
Thus, before men would be ready to receive Christ, moral
obstacles must be removed; men must repent of their sins
and turn from them. Luke closes his quotation from
Isaiah with the line, <q>And all flesh shall see the salvation of
God,</q> which is in accord with the universal character of his
Gospel.
</p>

<p>
The burden of the message preached by John was that
which in all ages has awakened a response in the hearts of
men: he preached sin and judgment, repentance and pardon.
The tone of his message as recorded by Luke, however,
was particularly severe; here he is said to have addressed
the multitudes as the <q>offspring of vipers</q> and to
have asked them why they were pretending to have heard a
warning of wrath to come. The reason for such severity
was that, while wishing to escape the impending judgment,
the people were unwilling to forsake their sins. They regarded
the baptism of John as a magical rite which could
make impenitent men safe in the hour of judgment. John
bade them show their repentance by their works and not to
trust in their descent from Abraham as securing their salvation.
He declared that judgment was upon them; the
ax was already lying at the root of the trees and every
fruitless tree was about to be <q>hewn down, and cast into
the fire.</q>
</p>

<p>
To the question of the people John made it perfectly
plain that by repentance he meant no mere form or ceremony,
nor was the word merely an abstract theological
term; the thing he demanded was plain and practical, that
each man should turn from his besetting sin and should
show love to his fellow man. Clothing and food were to be
given to those in need, for repentance meant to turn from
the sin of selfishness. Publicans or taxgatherers, who were
everywhere detested because of their dishonesty and greed,
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
were told to demand no more tribute than was appointed
and lawful. Soldiers, or more exactly <q>men on military
service,</q> possibly acting as local police, were told to extort
no money by violence and to seek for none by false charges,
and to be content with their wages. All who are to receive
Christ in any age must turn from their sins. Repentance
is not a mystical experience; it is plain and simple and practical.
It consists in turning from greed and dishonesty and
unkindness and violence and discontent, and from all that
is contrary to the revealed will of God.
</p>

<p>
The coming of Christ was very definitely predicted by
John. While some imagined that the prophet himself was
the Messiah, John declared that the mission of Christ was
so much greater than his own that he would be unworthy
as a slave, to loose the latchet of his shoes. While John
baptized with water, Christ would baptize with the Holy
Spirit and with fire. Water was a material element, and
merely symbolized an inward change; Jesus would bring
them into fellowship with a divine Person, and would exert
upon their souls cleansing and transforming power. He
would come, however, to punish the impenitent; he would
separate the wheat from the chaff; the former he would
gather into his garner, but the chaff he would burn with
unquenchable fire.
</p>

<p>
The close of the career of John is introduced by Luke at
this point of his narrative to prepare the way for his account
of the ministry of Christ. It was actually some time
after Jesus had begun his work that Herod the tetrarch
arrested John and cast him into prison because he had rebuked
the profligate king for his impurity and his sin. John
had been a faithful messenger of God, but the world does
not reverence its prophets; they are usually imprisoned,
beheaded, burned, or crucified.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>B. The Baptism Of Jesus. Ch. 3:21, 22</head>

<quote rend="display">
21 Now it came to pass, when all the people were baptized,
that, Jesus also having been baptized, and praying, the
heaven was opened, 22 and the Holy Spirit descended in a
bodily form, as a dove, upon him, and a voice came out of
heaven, Thou art my beloved Son; in thee I am well pleased.
</quote>

<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>

<p>
Why did the ideal Man, the Son of God, submit to the
baptism of John, a baptism of repentance? Surely not to
confess any sin of his own; but first of all to set his seal of
approval upon the work of John and to attest the message
which declared that repentance and confession of sin are
absolutely necessary for all who are to share the salvation
of Christ.
</p>

<p>
Then again by his baptism Jesus identified himself with
his people, not as being sinful, but as doing what they were
commanded to do and as sympathizing with them in their
hatred of sin, in their distress for its burden, and in their
hope and expectation of relief. Only those who sympathize
can serve and save.
</p>

<p>
Then again baptism indicated that the penitent had
broken with the past to begin a life of new holiness and
obedience. So in his baptism Jesus was ending his quiet
years of preparation in Nazareth and was about to enter
upon the ministry of service and sacrifice which was to be
performed in obedience to the will of his Father. It is for
this reason that Luke, with the art of a skilled historian,
first completed the story of John, the great forerunner,
before mentioning that which in reality was the supreme
incident in the career of John&mdash;his baptism of Jesus.
That incident introduced Jesus to his public ministry
and that ministry was to form the very substance of
the gospel.
</p>

<p>
That the incident is merely introductory to his narrative,
is evident also from the way in which Luke records the baptism.
He does not describe the event. He merely mentions
it to designate the time when Jesus saw the descending
Spirit and heard the voice from heaven. The former
was a symbolic indication of the power by which the work
of Jesus was to be performed; the latter was a declaration
that he was the Christ, upon whom rested the approval of
God.
</p>

<p>
We are not to suppose that Jesus before had lacked the
presence of the Holy Spirit, nor that he now assumed any
new relation to his Father, but, as in baptism he had yielded
himself to his appointed service, so now he was empowered
for his task; as in humility he had identified himself
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
with the sons of men, so now he was assured anew that he
was the Son of God; as he had shown his sympathy with
penitent sinners, he now was declared to be the sinless One
in whom God was well pleased.
</p>

<p>
Thus with the followers of Christ, while all enjoy the abiding
presence of his Spirit, yet, as they yield themselves
anew to his service, they are filled anew with his power,
they are strengthened for their tasks, and are cheered by a
new assurance of their sonship and their acceptance with
God. Luke alone mentions that this experience came
when Jesus was in prayer. He realized that it was a time
of crisis. Prayer is usually the condition of those heavenly
visions and spiritual experiences which prepare us for our
tasks in life.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>C. The Genealogy Of Jesus. Ch. 3:23-38</head>

<quote rend="display">
23 And Jesus himself, when he began <hi rend='italic'>to teach</hi>, was about
thirty years of age, being the son (as was supposed) of Joseph,
the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Heli, 24 the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of
Matthat, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Levi, the
<hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Melchi, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Jannai,
the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Joseph, 25 the
<hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Mattathias, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Amos,
the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Nahum, the
<hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Esli, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Naggai, 26
the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Maath, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi>
of Mattathias, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Semein, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi>
of Josech, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi>
of Joda, 27 the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Joanan, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi>
of Rhesa, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of
Zerubbabel, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Shealtiel, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi>
of Neri, 28 the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Melchi, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi>
of Addi, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Cosam, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of
Elmadam, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Er, 29 the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of
Jesus, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Eliezer, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of
Jorim, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Matthat,
the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Levi,
30 the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Symeon, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Judas,
the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Joseph,
the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Jonam, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Eliakim,
31 the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Melea,
the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Menna, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Mattatha,
the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Nathan,
the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of David, 32 the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Jesse,
the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Obed, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi>
of Boaz, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Salmon, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of
Nahshon, 33 the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi>
of Amminadab, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Arni, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi>
of Hezron, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi>
of Perez, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Judah, 34 the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of
Jacob, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of
Isaac, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Abraham, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of
Terah, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Nahor,
35 the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Serug, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Reu,
the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Peleg, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi>
of Eber, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Shelah, 36 the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi>
of Cainan, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of
Arphaxad, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Shem, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of
Noah, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of
Lamech, 37 the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Methuselah, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi>
of Enoch, the
<hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Jared, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Mahalaleel,
the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Cainan, 38 the
<hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Enos, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Seth,
the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Adam, the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of God.
</quote>

<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>

<p>
The genealogy of Jesus given by Luke contains marked
differences from that recorded by Matthew. Possibly
some of these differences can be explained and may be
found of real significance.
</p>

<p>
1. First of all, the genealogy is found in a different part
of the Gospel. In Matthew it opens the story; in Luke it
closes the third chapter. This is of course by no mere
chance. The purpose of Matthew is to prove that Jesus is
the Christ, the Messiah, who, as the King of Israel, fulfills
all the Old Testament prophecies. It is of the utmost importance
that Jesus should be shown to be the Son of David
and of Abraham and that the official genealogy containing
this record should open the story and even precede the account
of the nativity.
</p>

<p>
Luke, however, has given the significant account of the
birth and infancy and career of the great forerunner, John,
because of the light these throw upon the ministry of Christ.
Therefore, when the career of John has been related, when
the ministry of Jesus is about to be recorded, Luke gives his
genealogy to emphasize the fact that the narrative concerning
John has closed and the story of the ministry of
Jesus is about to begin. The genealogy is thus an artistic
interlude, or an important introduction. It suggests the
real purpose of the writer and marks the transition from
the ministry which called men to repentance to the saving
work which secures salvation from sin. The gospel is not
good advice but good news. We are not followers of John
but of Jesus.
</p>

<p>
2. Then again, the genealogy in Matthew follows the
order of descent; Luke ascends the family line from son to
father. The former is the order of an official record; individuals
are registered only as they are born; the latter
is that of a private document compiled from the public
records with a view to fixing the attention upon the particular
person whose name stands at the head of the list. This
is quite in accord with the literary art of Luke, who desires
at this point in the narrative to center the thought upon the
supreme importance of Jesus, the Saviour, of whose redeeming
work he is now to write.
</p>

<p>
3. In the third place, while the names given by Luke,
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
from Abraham to David, correspond with those given by
Matthew, the names from David to Jesus differ. Some
have attempted to explain the differences on the ground
that Matthew gives the genealogy of Joseph, while Luke
gives that of Mary. It is probably wiser to conclude that
both give the genealogy of Joseph, but Matthew traces the
line of royal succession showing Jesus to be the heir of
David; while Luke gives the line of actual descent. This
surely accords with the purpose of Matthew who ever depicts
Christ as the King, and also with the purpose of Luke
who is painting for us Christ as the true, the ideal Man.
</p>

<p>
4. Then, too, the genealogy in Matthew begins with
Abraham, while Luke traces the line back to Adam. The
former proves Jesus to be a Jew, the true son of Abraham, in
whom the covenant was fulfilled. The latter reminds us
that Jesus belongs to the whole human race. It makes us
look beyond all national lines and remember that this ideal
Man on whom Luke is fixing our thoughts is the Saviour of
mankind.
</p>

<p>
5. When the genealogy closes with the statement that
Adam was <q>the son of God,</q> it does indicate that Jesus
was reckoned as one in the great brotherhood of man, and
like all his brothers, owed his origin to God; but it does not
mean to deny that he also sustained to God a relationship
that is absolutely unique. The genealogy opens with the
statement that Jesus was the reputed Son of Joseph; he was
the legal heir of Joseph and so the promised Son of David
because of the marriage of Joseph to Mary; but he was
not really the son of Joseph; he was the <q>only begotten Son</q>
of God.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>D. The Temptation Of Jesus. Ch. 4:1-13</head>

<quote rend="display">
1 And Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the
Jordan, and was led in the Spirit in the wilderness 2 during
forty days, being tempted of the devil. And he did eat nothing
in those days: and when they were completed, he hungered.
3 And the devil said unto him, If thou art the Son of God,
command this stone that it become bread. 4 And Jesus
answered unto him, It is written, Man shall not live by bread
alone. 5 And he led him up, and showed him all the kingdoms
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
of the world in a moment of time. 6 And the devil
said unto him, To thee will I give all this authority, and the
glory of them: for it hath been delivered unto me; and to
whomsoever I will I give it. 7 If thou therefore wilt worship
before me, it shall all be thine. 8 And Jesus answered and
said unto him, It is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy
God, and him only shalt thou serve. 9 And he led him to
Jerusalem, and set him on the pinnacle of the temple, and
said unto him, If thou art the Son of God, cast thyself down
from hence: 10 for it is written,
<lg>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">He shall give his angels charge concerning thee, to guard
thee:</l>
</lg>
11 and,
<lg>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">On their hands they shall bear thee up,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Lest haply thou dash thy foot against a stone.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
12 And Jesus answering said unto him, It is said, Thou shalt
not make trial of the Lord thy God.
13 And when the devil had completed every temptation, he
departed from him for a season.
</quote>

<p>
The temptation of Jesus was the last step in the preparation
for his public ministry, and for many of his followers
the final discipline for service consists in such a trial as results
in a new determination to live not for self but for God.
</p>

<p>
The time of the temptation was significant. It was just
after Jesus had been filled with the Holy Spirit and had
been assured anew of his divine sonship. Under the influence
of the Spirit he was brought to the place of trial, and
the temptation consisted, in large part, of the suggestion to
use for selfish ends the divine powers of which he was conscious,
and to forget his filial relation to his Father. While
God never tempts us, in the sense of enticing us to sin, it
does seem to be a part of his gracious purpose to allow us to
be tested; these experiences come while we are guided by
his Spirit, and the essence of these temptations usually consists
in some inclination to please self in forgetfulness of our
true relation to God. The place of temptation was the
wilderness, and there is a sense in which the experience of
moral struggle is always one of intense loneliness. On the
other hand, to live in a literal desert does not free one from
solicitation to sin. Wherever one may be, he can be certain
of the presence and sympathy of Christ; and victory is
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
possible through faith in him. This seems to be the supreme
message of the story.
</p>

<p>
In both Matthew and Luke, three temptations are mentioned.
They are probably intended to be symbolic and
inclusive; and under one or the other of these enticements
to evil can be grouped all the moral trials of mankind. It
is to be noted, however, that the order of the temptations
given by Luke differs from that of Matthew. In both accounts
the first temptation is to make bread of stone; but
Luke mentions as the second temptation that which is last
in the account of Matthew, the temptation which offered to
Jesus all the kingdoms of the world. This was a fitting
climax to the testing of the King. Luke, however, mentions
last the temptation of Jesus to cast himself from the
pinnacle of the Temple and thus to test God. It is the
temptation in the sphere of intellectual desire and comes in
the subtle form of presumptuous trust. It forms a true
climax in the testing of the ideal Man. The order given by
Matthew is suggested by the apostle John who mentions
<q>the lust of the flesh and the lust of the eyes and the vainglory
of life.</q> The order of Luke takes us back to the
story of Eden and to the first human sin, which was due to
a love for that which was <q>good for food</q> and <q>a delight to
the eyes</q> and <q>to be desired to make one wise.</q> As in
Eden also, the first temptation is to doubt the goodness of
God, the second to doubt his power, and the third to distrust
his wisdom. The victory of Jesus, however, was secured
by the triumph of his faith, and faith is still <q>the victory
which overcomes the world.</q>
</p>

<p>
The first temptation, then, was in the sphere of bodily
appetite; Jesus was urged by Satan to transform a stone
into bread. Why not? His appetite was innocent; he
possessed the ability to gratify it. The sin, however,
would lie in his using divine power to satisfy his human
needs. If this should have been his way of life, there would
have been for him no hunger, no pain, no sorrow, no cross.
He would have defeated the very purpose for which he
came into the world; and anyone who makes the gratification
of appetite his supreme purpose is wasting his life.
The essence of the temptation, however, was to doubt the
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
goodness of God, as Jesus showed by his reply, <q>Man shall
not live by bread alone.</q> He was quoting from the Old
Testament; he was declaring that as by a miracle God preserved
his people of old, so now he would sustain the life of
his Son. Jesus would not be driven into a panic of fear.
He believed that God would supply his need and that, however
strong the demand of appetite might be, the way and
the will of God are certain to secure satisfaction and the
truest enjoyment in life.
</p>

<p>
The second temptation was in the sphere of earthly ambition.
It consisted in an offer of unlimited human power.
Satan would give to Jesus all the kingdoms of the world on
the condition that Jesus should bow down and worship him.
The force of the temptation consisted in the fact that Jesus
expected some day to rule the world. The Tempter suggested
that he himself possessed such power, and that if
Jesus would submit to him he would attain the desired goal
of universal rule. It was a temptation to doubt the power
of God and to be disloyal to him, as is shown by the reply of
Jesus, <q>Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shalt thou serve.</q>
</p>

<p>
This is a familiar form of temptation to-day. The Devil
does not ask us to give up our purposes of ultimate helpfulness
to others and service to the world; he only asks us to
compromise with the evil to attain our goal; he insists that
the end will justify the means; he intimates that in the
world of commerce, or society, or politics, evil methods are
so much in vogue that success can be attained only by complicity
with evil. He tells us that this is his world and that
we can rule only in so far as we make terms with him. For
Christ the issue was clearly drawn. It was submission to
Satan or loyalty to God. The latter would involve opposition
to the ruler of this world and therefore would mean
conflict and toil and tears and a cross; but the ultimate
issue would be universal rule. The same choice opens for
the followers of Christ. Unswerving loyalty is the way of
the cross, but this is the way of the crown.
</p>

<p>
The last temptation was in the sphere of intellectual curiosity.
It suggested to Jesus that he should see for himself
what would be the experience of one who should cast himself
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
from a great height and then, by angel hands, be kept
from harm. This is the temptation to place oneself needlessly
in a situation of moral peril and then to expect to be
delivered by God's miraculous power. This is not faith,
but presumption. Satan still seeks by this device to destroy
human souls. He urges men to see for themselves,
to increase their knowledge by experiences which needlessly
endanger their credit, their health, and their honor, to place
themselves in moral peril, to live beyond their means, to
undertake tasks beyond their strength. Jesus replied,
<q>Thou shalt not make trial of the Lord thy God.</q> In the
path of actual duty one need not fear the most threatening
danger; but one who puts himself in unnecessary peril need
not expect divine help. In his own time and way, and in
the path of our appointed service, God will open our eyes
and give us such knowledge as we need. To seek in
presumption for such knowledge while endangering our
souls is to doubt the wisdom of God. Real trust preserves
us from sinful presumption.
</p>

<p>
The story closes with the statement that when Jesus had
secured his victory the Devil <q>departed from him for a season.</q>
The life of faith is a life of repeated moral conflicts,
but victory is assured to those who trust in the goodness
and power and wisdom of God.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>IV. The Ministry in Galilee. Chs. 4:14 to 9:50</head>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>A. The First Period. Ch. 4:14-44</head>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>1. Jesus Preaching at Nazareth. Ch. 4:14-30</head>

<quote rend="display">
14 And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into
Galilee: and a fame went out concerning him through all the
region round about. 15 And he taught in their synagogues,
being glorified of all.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
16 And he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought
up: and he entered, as his custom was, into the synagogue
on the sabbath day, and stood up to read. 17 And there was
delivered unto him the book of the prophet Isaiah. And he
opened the book, and found the place where it was written,
<lg>
<l>18 The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Because he anointed me to preach good tidings to the poor:</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">He hath sent me to proclaim release to the captives,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">And recovering of sight to the blind,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">To set at liberty them that are bruised,</l>
<l>19 To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
20 And he closed the book, and gave it back to the attendant,
and sat down: and the eyes of all in the synagogue were
fastened on him. 21 And he began to say unto them, To-day
hath this scripture been fulfilled in your ears. 22 And all
bare him witness, and wondered at the words of grace which
proceeded out of his mouth: and they said, Is not this Joseph's
son? 23 And he said unto them, Doubtless ye will say unto
me this parable, Physician, heal thyself: whatsoever we have
heard done at Capernaum, do also here in thine own country.
24 And he said, Verily I say unto you, No prophet is acceptable
in his own country. 25 But of a truth I say unto you, There
were many widows in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the
heaven was shut up three years and six months, when there
came a great famine over all the land; 26 and unto none of
them was Elijah sent, but only to Zarephath, in the land of
Sidon, unto a woman that was a widow. 27 And there were
many lepers in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet; and
none of them was cleansed, but only Naaman the Syrian.
28 And they were all filled with wrath in the synagogue, as
they heard these things; 29 and they rose up, and cast him
forth out of the city, and led him unto the brow of the hill
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
whereon their city was built, that they might throw him down
headlong. 30 But he passing through the midst of them
went his way.
</quote>

<p>
After his baptism and temptation Jesus remained for a
time in Jerusalem and in Judea and then returned to Galilee
where he began that ministry to which Luke devotes the
next six chapters of his Gospel. Of this ministry he mentions
three features: First, it was wrought in the power of
the Holy Spirit; secondly, its fame extended through the
entire country; and thirdly, its essence consisted in the
most arresting and impressive public teaching.
</p>

<p>
The first recorded sermon of Jesus was preached in the
synagogue at Nazareth, the town in which he had spent his
youth and early manhood. Luke places this sermon at the
very opening of his record of the public ministry of Jesus,
probably because he regarded it as containing the program
of that ministry, or as forming the proclamation of the
saving work of our Lord.
</p>

<p>
It was a Sabbath Day. The place of worship was crowded
with the relatives and friends and townsmen of Jesus.
All were eager to hear one whom they knew so well, and
who had attained so sudden a renown. Either at his request,
or providentially, Jesus was handed the book of
Isaiah to lead in the reading of the Scripture. He found
the place in the prophecy where, in terms of the joy of Jubilee,
the writer is describing the gladness of those who are to
return from their long captivity in Babylon. When Jesus
had finished the lesson he sat down, thereby taking the attitude
of a public teacher. As all gazed upon him intently,
he undertook to show that the prophecy was to be fulfilled
by himself, claiming thereby to be the promised Messiah.
The very phrase with which the prophecy begins, <q>The
Spirit of the Lord is upon me,</q> indicates, when applied to
himself, that he had been anointed, not with oil as a
prophet or a priest or a king, but with the Holy Spirit as the
Anointed One, or the Christ of God. As such he was <q>to
preach good tidings to the poor,</q> that is, to those in spiritual
as well as in physical poverty. He was to proclaim deliverance
for those enslaved by sin and to establish those
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
principles which will result in political freedom for mankind.
He was <q>to set at liberty them that are bruised,</q>
that is, to remove the consequences and the cruelties of
selfishness and of crime. He was to proclaim the era of
universal blessedness which will result from his perfected
reign. Thus in these words, which combine the figures of
deliverance from captivity with those of the joy of jubilee,
Jesus expressed the gracious and beneficent character of his
ministry.
</p>

<p>
His auditors listened in amazement, unable to resist the
charm of his address or to deny the fascinating beauty of
his words, but unable also to admit his claim; they received
his predictions with stubborn unbelief. They expressed
their incredulity and at the same time explained it by their
question, <q>Is not this Joseph's son?</q> They were saying in
effect: <q>Is not this man our neighbor, the carpenter, with
whom we have all been acquainted; do we not know him
and his family? Surely he cannot be the Messiah.</q>
</p>

<p>
The reply of Jesus was to the effect that their unwillingness
to accept him was due in part to the fact that he had
not wrought in their presence the miracles which marked
his ministry in other places. This is what he meant by
quoting the proverb, <q>Physician, heal thyself,</q> that is,
<q>Establish your claim here as you have done elsewhere, if
you expect to be received as the Christ.</q> Jesus also
quoted another proverb to explain more fully their jealous
doubts: <q>No prophet is acceptable in his own country.</q>
Those most familiar with great men usually are least able
to appreciate their greatness; <q>Familiarity breeds contempt,</q>
because men are so apt to judge one another by
false standards and by that which is accidental and external
and because so frequently men do not know those whom
they think they know the best. This same stupid lack of
appreciation shadows human lives to-day, and makes us
fail to realize the worth of our friends and the value of our
opportunities, until it is too late. It even has its tragic
bearing upon the present ministry of Christ; some reject
him for reasons altogether superficial and foolish, thinking
that they know him perfectly because they long have been
familiar with his name, while in reality they fail to understand
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
the real beauty of his person and the transforming
power of his grace.
</p>

<p>
The unbelief of his auditors was turned to mad hatred as
Jesus gave two examples from Old Testament history, both
of which indicated that his townsmen, who knew him best,
were less worthy of his saving ministry than even men of
heathen nations. He even compared himself with Elijah
and Elisha and indicated that as the former brought a great
blessing to one who lived in Sidon and the latter to a prince
in Syria, while the people in Israel were suffering for their
unbelief, so the nations of the world would accept the
blessed salvation of Christ while those who knew him best
would suffer for their unbelief. So maddened were his
hearers by this severe rebuke that they drove him from the
city and tried to take his life, but he, with majestic calm
and divine strength, <q>passing through the midst of them
went his way.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is still true that those who have enjoyed the best opportunities
for knowing Christ often reject him; but, where
faith is present, broken hearts are healed as by Elijah of old
and lepers are cleansed as was Naaman by the word of
Elisha. Thus in this scene in the synagogue of Nazareth,
Jesus indicated not only the grace of his ministry but its
universal power. He came to relieve all the needs of mankind
and in all the world.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>2. Jesus Performing Miracles at Capernaum. Ch. 4:31-44</head>

<quote rend="display">
31 And he came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee.
And he was teaching them on the sabbath day: 32 and they
were astonished at his teaching; for his word was with authority.
33 And in the synagogue there was a man, that had
a spirit of an unclean demon; and he cried out with a loud
voice, 34 Ah! what have we to do with thee, Jesus thou
Nazarene? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who
thou art, the Holy One of God. 35 And Jesus rebuked him,
saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him. And when the
demon had thrown him down in the midst, he came out of
him, having done him no hurt. 36 And amazement came
upon all, and they spake together, one with another, saying,
What is this word? for with authority and power he commandeth
the unclean spirits, and they come out. 37 And
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
there went forth a rumor concerning him into every place of
the region round about.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
38 And he rose up from the synagogue, and entered into
the house of Simon. And Simon's wife's mother was holden
with a great fever; and they besought him for her. 39 And
he stood over her, and rebuked the fever; and it left her:
and immediately she rose up and ministered unto them.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
40 And when the sun was setting, all they that had any
sick with divers diseases brought them unto him; and he
laid his hands on every one of them, and healed them. 41
And demons also came out from many, crying out, and saying,
Thou art the Son of God. And rebuking them, he suffered
them not to speak, because they knew that he was the Christ.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
42 And when it was day, he came out and went into a
desert place: and the multitudes sought after him, and came
unto him, and would have stayed him, that he should not go
from them. 43 But he said unto them, I must preach the
good tidings of the kingdom of God to the other cities also:
for therefore was I sent.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
44 And he was preaching in the synagogues of Galilee.
</quote>

<p>
The Sabbath at Nazareth is placed by Luke in sudden
contrast with a Sabbath passed at Capernaum. On the
former, as the story opens, Jesus was surrounded by his
friends and townsmen; as it closes, they had turned into a
fierce mob which was seeking his death. In the
latter, as the scene opens, Jesus was faced by a demon;
but as it closes, he was surrounded by an admiring throng
who were eager to have him remain in their midst.
</p>

<p>
Jesus was again in a synagogue, and was awakening surprise
by the character of his message. Unlike the teachers
of his day, he spoke with authority instead of quoting reputed
<q>authorities</q> as he unfolded the Scriptures. Suddenly
the service was interrupted by the cries of a man who
was possessed by an unclean spirit. Jesus rebuked the
demon and compelled him to come out of the man. There
can be little doubt that the evil spirit which Jesus thus
controlled was an actual malign being who controlled the
poor sufferer whom Jesus graciously relieved; yet such an
<q>unclean spirit</q> is a type of the demoniac power of envy
and of lust and of anger, and of the whole host of debasing
passions from which Christ alone can give relief.
</p>

<p>
The second scene of this memorable Sabbath is in the
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
home of Simon Peter; here by a single word Jesus relieved a
poor sufferer from a severe fever. The cure was so instantaneous
that the woman who had been sick immediately
<q>rose up and ministered unto them.</q> It is probably true
that in many homes there are those, not afflicted by the
power of evil passions, who nevertheless are suffering from
worry and anxiety and fretfulness and unrest and so are
unable to render to others the gracious service which they
might perform if they could but hear the quieting word of
Christ and feel the soothing power of his touch.
</p>

<p>
The third scene is of peculiar beauty. When the sun had
set a great multitude gathered around the home of Peter,
attracted by the report of the miracle wrought in the synagogue.
They brought with them great numbers of those
who were sick or possessed by demons and Jesus healed
them all. This is a picture which in reality is being reproduced
to-day. Amid the shadows and mysteries of suffering
and pain the Saviour is standing; about him are gathered
those whom sin has stricken with its disease, the sad, the
loveless, the lonely, the tempted, the hopeless, the lost.
His touch <q>has still its ancient power.</q> In his mercy he
is healing them all, and in joy they are going away.
</p>

<p>
The last scene of this group is at dawn the next morning.
Jesus had withdrawn to <q>a desert place,</q> but the eager
multitudes had found him and were beseeching him not to
go from them. He reminded them, however, of the other
cities which needed to hear <q>the good tidings of the kingdom
of God.</q> Have all of us who have felt the healing
touch of Christ something of his sympathy for those who
have not yet heard the good news of his grace?
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>B. The Second Period. Chs. 5:1 to 6:11</head>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>1. The Call of the First Disciples. Ch. 5:1-11</head>

<quote rend="display">
1 Now it came to pass, while the multitude pressed upon
him and heard the word of God, that he was standing by the
lake of Gennesaret; 2 and he saw two boats standing by the
lake: but the fishermen had gone out of them, and were
washing their nets. 3 And he entered into one of the boats,
which was Simon's, and asked him to put out a little from
the land. And he sat down and taught the multitudes out of
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
the boat. 4 And when he had left speaking, he said unto
Simon, Put out into the deep, and let down your nets for a
draught. 5 And Simon answered and said, Master, we toiled
all night, and took nothing: but at thy word I will let down
the nets. 6 And when they had done this, they inclosed a
great multitude of fishes; and their nets were breaking; 7
and they beckoned unto their partners in the other boat, that
they should come and help them. And they came, and filled
both the boats, so that they began to sink. 8 But Simon
Peter, when he saw it, fell down at Jesus' knees, saying,
Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord. 9 For he
was amazed, and all that were with him, at the draught of
the fishes which they had taken; 10 and so were also James
and John, sons of Zebedee, who were partners with Simon.
And Jesus said unto Simon, Fear not; from henceforth thou
shalt catch men. 11 And when they had brought their boats
to land, they left all, and followed him.
</quote>

<p>
The call of his first disciples is regarded by many as opening
a new period in the public ministry of Jesus. His work
was now to assume a more permanent form. The growing
popularity of his preaching indicated that the gospel was
designed for the whole world. For such a proclamation a
definite group of workers must be prepared. The growth
of Christianity ever depends upon securing men who will
publicly confess and follow Christ.
</p>

<p>
The scene of this call is described as being <q>by the lake of
Gennesaret.</q> This charming sheet of water brings to
mind so many scenes in the life of our Lord that it has been
termed a <q>Fifth Gospel.</q> On its western and northern
side were the cities in which most of his work was done; the
eastern shores were not inhabited and thither Jesus would
resort for rest.
</p>

<p>
Those whom Jesus called were fishermen, sturdy, independent,
fearless. They were not strangers to Jesus nor
had they been indifferent to spiritual truths. They had
attended the preaching of the Baptist and had come to regard
Jesus as the Messiah, but they were now called to
leave their homes and their tasks and to become his constant
companions and disciples.
</p>

<p>
On this occasion Jesus had borrowed the boat belonging
to one of his friends to use as a pulpit and from this he had
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
addressed the crowds. When he had finished his discourse,
he gave to the four men he was about to call an impressive
object lesson of the character of the work and of the great
success which would attend their ministry if they would
forsake all and follow him. He wrought a miracle especially
impressive because it was in the sphere of their daily
calling at a time and place where they were sure it was useless
to fish. They were enabled by the guidance of Jesus to
take such a draft of fishes that their nets were strained and
their boats so loaded as nearly to sink. It was so plainly a
manifestation of supernatural power that Peter felt himself
to be in the presence of a divine Being and expressed
the fear which all have felt when face to face with God.
Jesus spoke the word which not only removed the terror of
Peter but gave to him and his companions courage for all
the coming years, <q>Fear not; from henceforth thou shalt
catch men.</q>
</p>

<p>
So to-day Jesus is calling men to become his disciples.
Obedience may involve sacrifice, but it is certain to result
in the saving of human souls.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>2. Jesus Cleansing a Leper. Ch. 5:12-16</head>

<quote rend="display">
12 And it came to pass, while he was in one of the cities,
behold, a man full of leprosy: and when he saw Jesus, he fell
on his face, and besought him, saying, Lord, if thou wilt,
thou canst make me clean. 13 And he stretched forth his
hand, and touched him, saying, I will; be thou made clean.
And straightway the leprosy departed from him. 14 And he
charged him to tell no man: but go thy way, and show thyself
to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing, according as Moses
commanded, for testimony unto them. 15 But so much the
more went abroad the report concerning him: and great multitudes
came together to hear, and to be healed of their infirmities.
16 But he withdrew himself in the deserts, and
prayed.
</quote>

<p>
Leprosy was regarded as the most loathsome and terrible
of diseases. It existed in various forms but its invariable
feature was its foul uncleanness. The leper was an outcast;
he was compelled to live apart from the dwellings of
men. He was required to wear a covering over his mouth
and to give warning of his approach by crying, <q>Unclean!
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
Unclean!</q> His case was regarded as hopeless; he was
reckoned as dead. Loathsome, insidious, corrupting, pervasive,
isolating, ceremonially and physically defiling,
surely leprosy is a fitting emblem of sin; and this graphic
narrative presents a parable of the power of Christ to
cleanse and to heal and to restore. It is a vivid picture
which Luke draws; the humble trust of the poor sufferer,
his pitiful cry, the sympathetic touch of Jesus, the word of
command and the instant cure. While Jesus forbade the
man to arouse excitement by telling of his healing, he commanded
him to report his case to the priest, that the highest
religious authorities might have unanswerable testimony
to the divine power of Christ, and also that the man might
bring the offerings required by the Law and thus express his
gratitude to God. Our Master does expect all who have
felt his healing touch to testify of his grace and to show
their gratitude by offering to him the service of their lives.
</p>

<p>
Such miracles could not be hid. The crowds so pressed
upon Jesus that he was forced to withdraw to the desert for
rest; and as the scene closed he who had startled the multitude
by the manifestation of his divine power was left alone
seeking help from God in prayer.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>3. Jesus Forgiving Sins. Ch. 5:17-26</head>

<quote rend="display">
17 And it came to pass on one of those days, that he was
teaching; and there were Pharisees and doctors of the law
sitting by, who were come out of every village of Galilee and
Judæa and Jerusalem: and the power of the Lord was with
him to heal. 18 And behold, men bring on a bed a man that
was palsied: and they sought to bring him in, and to lay him
before him. 19 And not finding by what <hi rend='italic'>way</hi> they might
bring him in because of the multitude, they went up to the
housetop, and let him down through the tiles with his couch
into the midst before Jesus. 20 And seeing their faith, he
said, Man, thy sins are forgiven thee. 21 And the scribes
and the Pharisees began to reason, saying, Who is this that
speaketh blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, but God alone?
22 But Jesus perceiving their reasonings, answered and said
unto them, Why reason ye in your hearts? 23 Which is easier,
to say, Thy sins are forgiven thee; or to say, Arise and walk?
24 But that ye may know that the Son of man hath authority
on earth to forgive sins (he said unto him that was palsied),
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
I say unto thee, Arise, and take up thy couch, and go unto
thy house. 25 And immediately he rose up before them, and
took up that whereon he lay, and departed to his house, glorifying
God. 26 And amazement took hold on all, and they
glorified God; and they were filled with fear, saying, We
have seen strange things to-day.
</quote>

<p>
Leprosy was the symbol of the uncleanness of sin; paralysis
of its impotence and pain. On the occasion of healing
a paralytic, Jesus, however, did something more startling:
he forgave sin. The poor sufferer had been borne by his
four friends who were discouraged by no obstacles. When
they were unable to enter the house where Jesus was, because
of the multitudes which surrounded it, they went to
the roof and let the sick man down through the tiles into
the very presence of Christ. Their earnestness is a rebuke
to us who make so little effort to bring our comrades within
the healing influence of our Lord.
</p>

<p>
Jesus recognized the faith both of the man and of his
friends and responded with an utterance which occasioned
his hearers more surprise than had the opening of the roof,
<q>Man, thy sins are forgiven thee.</q> No request had been
made for such forgiveness, but Jesus read the heart. He
saw the yearning of the sufferer for healing not only of his
body but of his soul. He recognized his sorrow for the sin
which had caused the sickness, and the anguish of remorse
and immediately he spoke the word of pardon and of peace.
Thus Jesus voiced the message which the world seems reluctant
to accept. He declared that physical ills and social
evils are less serious than the moral and spiritual maladies
of which they are the symptoms and the results; and further,
he expressed his claim of divine power to pronounce
pardon and to remove guilt.
</p>

<p>
This claim at once aroused the bitter resentment of the
scribes and Pharisees who were present and they began to
reason: <q>Who is this that speaketh blasphemies? Who
can forgive sins, but God alone?</q> Their reasoning was
correct. Jesus was a blasphemer worthy of death, or else
he was divine.
</p>

<p>
To prove his deity Jesus proposed an immediate test:
<q>Which is easier, to say, Thy sins are forgiven thee; or to
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
say, Arise and walk?</q> Of course neither is easier; either
requires divine power. Therefore, when at the word of
Jesus the man arose and started for his home, <q>glorifying
God,</q> it is not strange that <q>amazement took hold on all,
and they glorified God.</q>
</p>

<p>
Thus the miracles of Christ were real proofs of his deity
as well as expressions of his love; they were moreover parables
of his ability and willingness to deliver man from the
guilt and power of sin.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>4. The Call of Levi. Ch. 5:27-32</head>

<quote rend="display">
27 And after these things he went forth, and beheld a
publican, named Levi, sitting at the place of toll, and said
unto him, Follow me. 28 And he forsook all, and rose up
and followed him.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
29 And Levi made him a great feast in his house: and
there was a great multitude of publicans and of others that
were sitting at meat with them. 30 And the Pharisees and
their scribes murmured against his disciples, saying, Why do
ye eat and drink with the publicans and sinners? 31 And
Jesus answering said unto them, They that are in health
have no need of a physician; but they that are sick. 32 I am
not come to call the righteous but sinners to repentance.
</quote>

<p>
Nothing could further emphasize the sympathy of Jesus
than his calling a publican to be his close companion and
friend. These taxgatherers were everywhere despised for
their dishonesty, extortion, and greed; but Jesus chose one
of them named Levi, or Matthew, and transformed him
into an apostle, an evangelist, and a saint.
</p>

<p>
There must have been something admirable in the character
of the man; at least there was something inspiring
in his example, for as soon as he heard the clear call of
the Master, <q>He forsook all, and rose up and followed
him.</q>
</p>

<p>
Probably he had more to leave than any of the twelve
men who became apostles of Christ. He must have been
possessed of wealth. At least, as soon as he was converted,
he made <q>a great feast in his house</q> and invited <q>a great
multitude of publicans and of others</q> to be his guests. He
had the courage of his convictions; he was not ashamed of
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
his new Master. He was eager to have his old friends
introduced to Christ.
</p>

<p>
It was on the occasion of this feast that Jesus was criticized
by the Pharisees for eating and drinking with publicans
and sinners. He made this most significant reply:
<q>They that are in health have no need of a physician; but
they that are sick. I am not come to call the righteous but
sinners to repentance.</q> By this statement Jesus emphasized
and vindicated his conduct and defined his mission.
A physician enters a sick room, not because he delights in
disease or rejoices in suffering, but because he desires to
cure and to relieve; so Jesus companied with sinners not because
he countenanced sin or enjoyed the society of the depraved,
but because, as a healer of souls, he was willing to
go where he was most needed and to work where the ravages
of sin were most severe. He came into the world to
save sinners. Their conduct distressed him, their sins
pained him; but to accomplish his task he sought them out
and showed his sympathy by his presence and by his healing
power.
</p>

<p>
Are there any who do not need the spiritual cure he can
effect? Are any <q>sound;</q> are some not <q>sinners</q>? These
questions each must answer for himself. Probably those
who like the Pharisees are least conscious of their sickness
are in most desperate danger. Then again, are those who
know his power willing like the Master to go with his gospel
to the places of greatest need?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>5. The Question of Fasting. Ch. 5:33-39</head>

<quote rend="display">
33 And they said unto him, The disciples of John fast
often, and make supplications; likewise also the <hi rend='italic'>disciples</hi> of
the Pharisees; but thine eat and drink. 34 And Jesus said
unto them, Can ye make the sons of the bride-chamber fast,
while the bridegroom is with them? 35 But the days will
come; and when the bridegroom shall be taken away from
them, then will they fast in those days. 36 And he spake also
a parable unto them: No man rendeth a piece from a new
garment and putteth it upon an old garment; else he will rend
the new, and also the piece from the new will not agree with
the old. 37 And no man putteth new wine into old wine-skins;
else the new wine will burst the skins, and itself will
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
be spilled, and the skins will perish. 38 But new wine must
be put into fresh wine-skins. 39 And no man having drunk
old <hi rend='italic'>wine</hi> desireth new; for he saith, The old is good.
</quote>

<p>
The Pharisees were disturbed by the attitude of Jesus
toward sinners. Much more were they distressed by his
attitude toward the forms and ceremonies which to their
mind constituted the very essence of religion. This attitude
had been expressed by the failure of Jesus to require
his disciples to observe the fasts which had become so prominent
in the system of legalism taught by the religious leaders
of the Jews. The Law of Moses prescribed no fasts.
The rabbis had so multiplied them that a Pharisee could
boast of fasting <q>twice in the week.</q> The disciples of John
the Baptist were taught to fast frequently, not as an empty
form, but to express the solemn character of the ministry of
John who had come preaching <q>repentance unto remission
of sins.</q> It was not strange, therefore, that the enemies of
Jesus came to him with a complaint and with the question,
<q>The disciples of John fast often, and make supplications;
likewise also the disciples of the Pharisees; but thine eat
and drink.</q> In his reply Jesus stated distinctly the view
his followers should take, not only of fasting but of all religious
forms: <q>Can ye make the sons of the bride-chamber
fast, while the bridegroom is with them? But the days
will come; and when the bridegroom shall be taken away
from them, then will they fast in those days.</q> Fasting is
an expression of sorrow. How absurd then would it be for
Jesus' followers to fast while the heavenly Bridegroom was
with them! They might express their distress thus when
he should be taken away. Thus Jesus declared that fasting,
like all religious rites, may be quite fitting if it is a true
expression of religious feeling, but if it is a matter of form,
of rule, or requirement, if it is regarded as a ground of merit,
it is an absurdity and an impertinence.
</p>

<p>
Jesus added a parable which further indicates his attitude
toward all the rites and ceremonies in which the Pharisees
took such delight. He declared that he had not come
to regulate the fasts and feasts or to amend the Jewish ritual.
That would be like sewing a new patch on an old
garment. This religion of ceremonies had served its purpose.
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
Jesus had come with something, new and better.
The life of freedom and of joy which he was imparting
could not be bound up in the narrow forms and rites of
Judaism. New wine could not be kept in old wine skins.
</p>

<p>
Christianity cannot be comprehended by any system of
rites and ceremonies. It must not be interpreted as a set
of rules and requirements; it must not be confused with any
ritual. It controls men, not by rules, but by motives. Its
symbol is not a fast but a feast, for its pervasive spirit is
joy.
</p>

<p>
As reported by Luke, Jesus added a characteristic phrase
indicating his tender sympathy, <q>And no man having
drunk old wine desireth new; for he saith, The old is good.</q>
Those who long have been accustomed to a religion of
forms find it difficult to be satisfied with the religion of
faith. We must be patient with them. It is not easy for
them to give up the practices of childhood and it takes time
for them to learn the gladness and the freedom of spiritual
maturity offered to the followers of Christ.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>6. The Sabbath Controversy. Ch. 6:1-11</head>

<quote rend="display">
1 Now it came to pass on a sabbath, that he was going
through the grainfields; and his disciples plucked the ears,
and did eat, rubbing them in their hands. 2 But certain of the
Pharisees said, Why do ye that which it is not lawful to do on
the sabbath day? 3 And Jesus answering them said, Have
ye not read even this, what David did, when he was hungry,
he, and they that were with him; 4 how he entered into the
house of God, and took and ate the showbread, and gave
also to them that were with him; which it is not lawful to eat
save for the priests alone? 5 And he said unto them, The
Son of man is lord of the sabbath.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
6 And it came to pass on another sabbath, that he entered
into the synagogue and taught: and there was a man there,
and his right hand was withered. 7 And the scribes and the
Pharisees watched him, whether he would heal on the sabbath;
that they might find how to accuse him. 8 But he
knew their thoughts; and he said to the man that had his
hand withered, Rise up, and stand forth in the midst. And
he arose and stood forth. 9 And Jesus said unto them, I ask
you, Is it lawful on the sabbath to do good, or to do harm?
to save a life, or to destroy it? 10 And he looked round about
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
on them all, and said unto him, Stretch forth thy hand. And
he did so: and his hand was restored. 11 But they were filled
with madness; and communed one with another what they
might do to Jesus.
</quote>

<p>
Jesus had aroused the anger of the Pharisees by his claim
to forgive sins. He had further enraged them by his treatment
of sinners. But he brought their hatred to a climax
of fury by his attitude toward Sabbath observance. Henceforth
they sought to destroy him.
</p>

<p>
The question of the Sabbath has never lost its interest.
The followers of Christ need to stand firmly by the principles
set forth by their Lord. These principles are few but
fundamental: The Sabbath is a day designed for worship
and for rest and is to be broken only by works of necessity
and of mercy.
</p>

<p>
The first of these exceptions to the required rest of the
Sabbath Day was illustrated by the case of the disciples who
were accused by the Pharisees of breaking the Sabbath because
as they walked through the fields they picked the
ripened ears and thus, according to the interpretation of
their enemies, were guilty of working on the Sabbath Day.
Our Lord did not deny that the Sabbath law had been
broken. He merely referred his enemies to the case of
David and his followers who, forced by hunger, broke the
Mosaic Law in entering the tabernacle and eating the
<q>showbread.</q> Jesus argued that, when necessary to relieve
their hunger, his followers were also justified in disregarding
the law of rest.
</p>

<p>
An illustration of the second exception to the law of absolute
cessation from labor was given <q>on another sabbath</q>
when in the synagogue Jesus healed a man whose right
hand was <q>withered.</q> The Pharisees regarded this action
of Jesus as another breach of the law of rest. Jesus defended
his action on the ground that it was dictated by
mercy and that work which secured relief from suffering
was allowable on the Sabbath Day. He replied to his
enemies by a searching question, assuming the principle
that refraining from help is the same as inflicting harm.
He, asked them whether they regarded the Sabbath Day as
of such character as to make it right on that day to do that
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
which on other days was wrong: <q>I ask you, Is it lawful on
the sabbath to do good, or to do harm? to save a life, or to
destroy it?</q>
</p>

<p>
While Jesus taught that the law of rest might thus be
broken to meet the necessities of man and to show mercy to
those in need or in distress, he by no means abrogated the
Sabbath. He declared, however, that <q>the Son of man is
lord of the sabbath,</q> by which he meant that as the representative
of men he had a right to interpret the Law for the
highest good of man. He was justified in relieving the
Sabbath from the narrow and burdensome observances
which had been bound upon it by the Pharisees and to restore
it to mankind as a glad day of rest and of refreshment
and of fellowship with God.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>C. The Third Period. Chs. 6:12 to 8:56</head>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>1. The Choice of the Twelve. Ch. 6:12-19</head>

<quote rend="display">
12 And it came to pass in these days, that he went out into
the mountain to pray; and he continued all night in prayer to
God. 13 And when it was day, he called his disciples; and
he chose from them twelve, whom also he named apostles:
14 Simon, whom he also named Peter, and Andrew his
brother, and James and John, and Philip and Bartholomew,
15 and Matthew and Thomas, and James <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Alphæus,
and Simon who was called the Zealot, 16 and Judas <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi>
of James, and Judas Iscariot, who became a traitor; 17 and
he came down with them, and stood on a level place, and a
great multitude of his disciples, and a great number of the
people from all Judæa and Jerusalem, and the sea coast of
Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear him, and to be healed of
their diseases; 18 and they that were troubled with unclean
spirits were healed. 19 And all the multitude sought to touch
him; for power came forth from him, and healed <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> all.
</quote>

<p>
The choice of the twelve apostles marks a new and important
period in the public ministry of our Lord. The
deep significance of the act is indicated by Luke in his
statement that Jesus passed the entire preceding night in
prayer to God. One reason for his decision may have been
the mad hatred of the Pharisees whose anger had now
reached a murderous height. To give more assured permanence
to his work Jesus saw the necessity of organizing
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
his followers. He had been surrounded by a multitude of
disciples, some of whom were his constant companions, but
he now determined to appoint officers who would act as
trained leaders, who would be his official messengers accredited
by miraculous powers.
</p>

<p>
In all four places in the New Testament where the names
of these twelve apostles are found, they are arranged in
three invariable groups, possibly in accordance with their
intimacy with Jesus and their real service to him. In all
ages there have been among his followers such concentric
circles, such inner groups, who have been blessed by peculiar
intimacy with their Lord, not due to his arbitrary
choice, but to their peculiar capacities for love and obedience
and faith.
</p>

<p>
The first six mentioned by Luke were men who under the
influence of John the Baptist had become the first followers
of Christ. Other things being equal, those who have known
Jesus longest are able to serve him best.
</p>

<p>
The chief place in the first group is always assigned to
Simon Peter, bold, impulsive, fickle, but possessing the peculiar
powers of leadership which qualified him for the
place of primacy among the apostles of our Lord.
</p>

<p>
With him Luke names his brother Andrew, probably a
man of less ability and strength, but one who will ever be
remembered as having brought Peter into fellowship with
Jesus. None can ever tell what share in the reward of a
more famous worker will be enjoyed by one more obscure
to whom the greater leader owes his Christian career.
</p>

<p>
The next to be mentioned are James and John, the <q>sons
of thunder,</q> the courageous, loving, faithful companions
who with Peter form the inmost circle of the followers of
Christ. James was the first to suffer martyrdom for the
sake of his Master, while John lingered longest of all the
apostolic band, testifying to the cause of him who had
chosen John as his closest friend, and for whose return
John continued to watch and to wait.
</p>

<p>
Of the second four, the first to be mentioned are Philip
and Bartholomew; the latter is supposed to be the same as
Nathanael, the Israelite without guile whom Philip won as
a disciple for Christ.
</p>

<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>

<p>
The next were Matthew and Thomas. The former had
been a despised publican, but his training had prepared him
to become a careful recorder of facts, so that after his intimate
fellowship with Christ he became one of his biographers
and wrote that which is numbered as the first of the
Gospels. Thomas has won the reputation of being a
doubting disciple. He was certainly naturally despondent
and incredulous. The fact, however, that such a man became
convinced of the resurrection of Christ so soon after
the event is one of the most important testimonies to the
reality of the fundamental fact of our Christian faith.
</p>

<p>
As to the last group, we know nothing of James, the son
of Alphæus, commonly called <q>James the less</q> in contrast
with James the brother of John; but it is surely a mistake to
identify him with James the brother of our Lord who became
the head of the church in Jerusalem and wrote the
Epistle which bears his name. <q>Simon who was called the
Zealot</q> was by this latter title distinguished from Simon
Peter. If this title is correctly interpreted, he had formerly
belonged to that fanatical party of Jews who were promoters
and supporters of the revolt against Rome, which
finally resulted in the destruction of Jerusalem.
</p>

<p>
Judas, the son of James, is carefully distinguished in the
narrative from the traitor whose infamous name always
comes last on the list of apostles and is never mentioned in
Scripture without some designation of disgrace and shame.
Why he should have been chosen as a follower of Christ no
one can sufficiently explain, yet there must have been in
him original elements of good. There was surely the possibility
of development into usefulness and sainthood, but he
tried to cherish the passion of greed while companying
with Jesus, and the inevitable reaction was so great and
rapid that he soon degenerated into a thief and a traitor.
His fate serves as a warning to all the followers of Christ
and his testimony to the character of Jesus has been repeated
through all the years, <q>I have ... betrayed innocent
blood.</q>
</p>

<p>
All of the Twelve were men of modest means and humble
stations in life; they were men of moderate ability, and
most of their names are still obscure; yet they were the first
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
leaders and the real organizers of the most important society
the world has known, and their names are yet to be
graven on the foundations of the holy city, the light of
which is to fill the earth with glory.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>2. The Great Sermon. Ch. 6:20-49</head>

<quote rend="display">
20 And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples, and said,
Blessed <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. 21
Blessed <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed
<hi rend='italic'>are</hi> ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh. 22 Blessed are ye,
when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you
<hi rend='italic'>from their company</hi>, and reproach you, and cast out your
name as evil, for the Son of man's sake. 23 Rejoice in that
day, and leap <hi rend='italic'>for joy</hi>: for behold, your reward is great in
heaven; for in the same manner did their fathers unto the
prophets. 24 But woe unto you that are rich! for ye have received
your consolation. 25 Woe unto you, ye that are full
now! for ye shall hunger. Woe <hi rend='italic'>unto you</hi>, ye that laugh now
for ye shall mourn and weep. 26 Woe <hi rend='italic'>unto you</hi>, when all
men shall speak well of you! for in the same manner did
their fathers to the false prophets.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
27 But I say unto you that hear, Love your enemies, do
good to them that hate you, 28 bless them that curse you,
pray for them that despitefully use you. 29 To him that
smiteth thee on the <hi rend='italic'>one</hi> cheek offer also the other; and from
him that taketh away thy cloak withhold not thy coat also.
30 Give to every one that asketh thee; and of him that taketh
away thy goods ask them not again. 31 And as ye would
that men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise. 32
And if ye love them that love you, what thank have ye? for
even sinners love those that love them. 33 And if ye do good
to them that do good to you, what thank have ye? for even
sinners do the same. 34 And if ye lend to them of whom ye
hope to receive, what thank have ye? even sinners lend to
sinners, to receive again as much. 35 But love your enemies,
and do <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> good, and lend, never despairing; and your reward
shall be great, and ye shall be sons of the Most High:
for he is kind toward the unthankful and evil. 36 Be ye
merciful, even as your Father is merciful. 37 And judge
not, and ye shall not be judged: and condemn not, and ye
shall not be condemned: release, and ye shall be released:
38 give, and it shall be given unto you; good measure, pressed
down, shaken together, running over, shall they give into
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
your bosom. For with what measure ye mete it shall be
measured to you again.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
39 And he spake also a parable unto them, Can the blind
guide the blind? shall they not both fall into a pit? 40 The
disciple is not above his teacher: but every one when he is
perfected shall be as his teacher. 41 And why beholdest
thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not
the beam that is in thine own eye? 42 Or how canst thou say
to thy brother, Brother, let me cast out the mote that is in
thine eye, when thou thyself beholdest not the beam that is
in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, cast out first the beam
out of thine own eye, and then shalt thou see clearly to cast
out the mote that is in thy brother's eye. 43 For there is no
good tree that bringeth forth corrupt fruit; nor again a corrupt
tree that bringeth forth good fruit. 44 For each tree
is known by its own fruit. For of thorns men do not gather
figs, nor of a bramble bush gather they grapes. 45 The
good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth
forth that which is good; and the evil <hi rend='italic'>man</hi> out of the evil
<hi rend='italic'>treasure</hi> bringeth forth that which is evil: for out of the
abundance of the heart his mouth speaketh.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
46 And why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things
which I say? 47 Every one that cometh unto me, and heareth
my words, and doeth them, I will show you to whom he is
like: 48 he is like a man building a house, who digged and
went deep, and laid a foundation upon the rock: and when
a flood arose, the stream brake against that house, and could
not shake it: because it had been well builded. 49 But he
that heareth, and doeth not, is like a man that built a house
upon the earth without a foundation; against which the
stream brake, and straightway it fell in; and the ruin of
that house was great.
</quote>

<p>
It might seem difficult to prove that the Sermon on the
Mount is the same as this discourse which has been called
by some the Sermon on the Plain. The exact relation between
the sermon reported by Matthew and this great address
recorded by Luke has long been a subject of debate.
It is quite probable, however, that they are identical. After
Jesus had chosen the twelve apostles on the summit of the
mountain where he had spent the night, he descended to a
level place on the mountain side and there met the multitude
and delivered the sermon which holds first place
among all the discourses in the world.
</p>

<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>

<p>
If this address is the same as the Sermon on the Mount,
it is to be noted that each account begins with beatitudes
and closes with a warning, while the main body of the discourse
differs only in the aspect of truth emphasized by the
two writers. In Matthew the essence of the Christian life
is described as true righteousness in distinction from the
formalism of the Pharisees. In Luke the essence of righteousness
is found in love. Matthew was writing with
Jewish Christians in mind. The Gospel of Luke was for
the world and many of his readers would not have appreciated
the distinction which Matthew was emphasizing. The
word which would describe the sermon as recorded by
Matthew is spirituality, but the substance of the Christian
life as here indicated by Luke is charity.
</p>

<p>
The Beatitudes here recorded are four in number, while
Matthew mentions eight or nine; but Luke adds four woes,
each one of which is in striking contrast with the parallel
Beatitude, vs. 20-26. The sermon begins, therefore, by
pronouncing blessings upon the followers of Christ and contrasted
woes upon those who reject him. Those who are
declared to be blessed are the poor, the hungry, the mourners,
and the despised; while woes are pronounced upon the
rich, the satisfied, the joyous, and the praised. It is, of
course, understood that there are spiritual implications in
these different terms. Poverty, hunger, sorrow, reproach,
have no merit in themselves and issue in present and eternal
blessedness only when accompanied by humility, trust,
and patience, and when endured for the sake of Christ. So,
too, there is no wrong in riches and satisfaction and laughter
and praise unless these are accompanied by the selfishness
and greed and frivolity and unworthiness with which
they are so often identified. By these blessings and woes
the Master indicated the real character as well as the abiding
blessedness of those who are his true disciples.
</p>

<p>
The burden of the discourse, vs. 27-45, sets forth the
Christian life as being in essence a life of love. This sermon
on love might be accompanied properly by the <q>hymn
of love</q> composed by Paul, 1 Cor., ch. 13, and by the
<q>Scripture lesson</q> on love written by John, 1 John 4:7-21.
</p>

<p>
First then, in place of all revenge, vs. 27-30, Jesus established
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
the Golden Rule: <q>As ye would that men should do
to you, do ye also to them likewise.</q> V. 31. Then, in contrast
with the self-interest and desire for recompense which
so often passes among men as charity, vs. 32-34, he pointed
to the perfect example of God and intimated that his mercy
should incline us to kindly judgments of our fellows, assuring
us of the boundless liberality with which our Father will
reward our unselfish love. Vs. 35-38.
</p>

<p>
The second portion of the main discussion, vs. 39-45,
dwells still more definitely upon the fault of unkindly judgments
to which Jesus had just referred and which constitutes
such a common infraction of the law of love. A man
who is unkind in his criticisms and unconscious of his own
faults cannot help his fellow man; he is like a blind man trying
to lead the blind, like one in whose eye there is a beam
trying to help one in whose eye there is a mote. As good
fruit is produced only by good trees, only out of hearts full
of love can real helpfulness come.
</p>

<p>
To warn men against calling themselves Christians while
they do not observe the law of love, and to encourage his
disciples in faithfully keeping his commandments, Jesus
concluded this sermon with the familiar figure of the two
houses, founded one upon the sand and the other upon the
rock. Amid the storms and tempests and floods of the
time of judgment, only the latter will stand secure.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>3. The Centurion of Capernaum. Ch. 7:1-10</head>

<quote rend="display">
1 After he had ended all his sayings in the ears of the
people, he entered into Capernaum.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
2 And a certain centurion's servant, who was dear unto
him, was sick and at the point of death. 3 And when he
heard concerning Jesus, he sent unto him elders of the Jews,
asking him that he would come and save his servant. 4 And
they, when they came to Jesus, besought him earnestly, saying,
He is worthy that thou shouldest do this for him; 5 for
he loveth our nation, and himself built us our synagogue.
6 And Jesus went with them. And when he was now not far
from the house, the centurion sent friends to him, saying
unto him, Lord, trouble not thyself; for I am not worthy that
thou shouldest come under my roof: 7 wherefore neither
thought I myself worthy to come unto thee: but say the
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
word, and my servant shall be healed. 8 For I also am a
man set under authority, having under myself soldiers: and
I say to this one, Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come,
and he cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it.
9 And when Jesus heard these things, he marvelled at him,
and turned and said unto the multitude that followed him, I
say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel.
10 And they that were sent, returning to the house, found
the servant whole.
</quote>

<p>
No more perfect picture of faith has been recorded than
that in which Luke sketches the centurion of Capernaum
who sent to Jesus the request to heal a favorite servant then
lying at the door of death. This military commander, a
heathen by birth, was evidently a man of the same high
character as is attributed in the New Testament to all soldiers
of a similar rank. It may be helpful to notice some
features of his faith which was so great that our Lord <q>marvelled
at him.</q> First of all, the centurion was confident
that Jesus could cure, because of what he had heard concerning
our Lord. This is the very essence of faith, namely
belief founded upon evidence. Faith is not credulity or
fancy or caprice; it is a purely rational exercise of the mind;
it is reasoning from the reports of credible witnesses. The
centurion had heard enough of the power and goodness of
Jesus to convince him of his ability to heal. Unbelief in
the face of evidence is stupidity or sin.
</p>

<p>
Again, the centurion revealed the sincerity of true faith.
He had accepted light as far as this had been revealed. He
had been attracted by the pure worship of Judaism and had
shown his sympathy with its adherents by building for
them a synagogue. When one lives in accordance with the
light he has, more light is sure to break.
</p>

<p>
Then again, he revealed the humility of faith. He regarded
himself as unworthy to come into the presence of
Jesus to present his request; and when Jesus offered to
come to his home, he sent word that he was not worthy to
have the Master come under his roof.
</p>

<p>
Most explicitly of all, he expressed the trust in Christ and
the dependence upon his power which characterize true
faith. He said that it was unnecessary for Jesus to come to
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
his house; as a soldier and an officer he knew what could be
accomplished by a word of command; he knew what it was
to obey and to be obeyed, and he had accredited to Jesus
such control over the unseen powers of disease that he sent
his surprising message, <q>But say the word, and my servant
shall be healed.</q> It was just this aspect of his faith
which so impressed our Lord, and it is such humble trust
that he still regards with favor and is certain to reward. It
is not strange that they <q>that were sent, returning to the
house, found the servant whole,</q> or that Luke rejoiced to
tell this story which reveals belief in Christ on the part of
one who was found outside of Israel, a belief which was
prophetic of the blessings which faith was to bring to men
of all the nations in the world.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>4. Jesus Raising the Widow's Son. Ch. 7:11-17</head>

<quote rend="display">
11 And it came to pass soon afterwards, that he went to a
city called Nain; and his disciples went with him, and a great
multitude. 12 Now when he drew near to the gate of the city,
behold, there was carried out one that was dead, the only
son of his mother, and she was a widow: and much people
of the city were with her. 13 And when the Lord saw her, he
had compassion on her, and said unto her, Weep not. 14
And he came nigh and touched the bier: and the bearers
stood still. And he said, Young man, I say unto thee, Arise.
15 And he that was dead sat up, and began to speak. And
he gave him to his mother. 16 And fear took hold on all:
and they glorified God, saying, A great prophet is arisen among
us: and, God hath visited his people. 17 And this report went
forth concerning him in the whole of Judæa, and all the
region round about.
</quote>

<p>
If it was the purpose of Luke to impress upon his readers
the sympathy and tenderness of the Man Christ Jesus, it is
easy to understand why he alone of all the evangelists records
this touching story of the raising from the dead of the
son of the widow of Nain. No picture could be more full
of pity and compassion. Jesus had not been asked to perform
the miracle; he was moved wholly by the mute appeal
of human sorrow and distress. As he drew near to the gate
of the little city, he met the sad procession wending its way
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
out to the place of burial. He was touched by the tears of
the lonely mother who had lost her only son; moved with
deep compassion he spoke to her the word of hope, <q>Weep
not.</q> Then he came near and touched the bier on which
the lifeless body was being borne. It was a sign more eloquent
than a spoken word. Then came the command:
<q>Young man, I say unto thee, Arise. And he that was
dead sat up, and began to speak. And he gave him to his
mother.</q> In view of such miracles, possibly we dwell too
exclusively upon their purpose as authenticating the mission
of Jesus, or as demonstrating his divine message.
These purposes are real, but we must never forget that such
works were also manifestations of the nature of the ministry
of Jesus and revelations of the very heart of God. Such
recitals dry the tears of mourners and bind up broken
hearts and inspire the despondent with eternal hope. Surely
Jesus is the Lord of life and he will yet wipe away all tears
from the eyes of those that trust him.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>5. Jesus Praising John. Ch. 7:18-35</head>

<quote rend="display">
18 And the disciples of John told him of all these things.
19 and John calling unto him two of his disciples sent them
to the Lord, saying, Art thou he that cometh, or look we for
another? 20 And when the men were come unto him, they
said, John the Baptist hath sent us unto thee, saying, Art
thou he that cometh, or look we for another? 21 In that
hour he cured many of diseases and plagues and evil spirits;
and on many that were blind he bestowed sight. 22 And,
he answered and said unto them, Go and tell John the things
which ye have seen and heard; the blind receive their sight,
the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear,
the dead are raised up, the poor have good tidings preached
to them. 23 And blessed is he, whosoever shall find no
occasion of stumbling in me.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
24 And when the messengers of John were departed, he
began to say unto the multitudes concerning John, What
went ye out into the wilderness to behold? a reed shaken
with the wind? 25 But what went ye out to see? a man clothed
in soft raiment? Behold, they that are gorgeously apparelled,
and live delicately, are in kings' courts. 26 But what went ye
out to see? a prophet? Yea, I say unto you, and much more
than a prophet. 27 This is he of whom it is written,
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
<lg>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Behold, I send my messenger before thy face,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Who shall prepare thy way before thee.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
28 I say unto you, Among them that are born of women
there is none greater than John: yet he that is but little in the
kingdom of God is greater than he. 29 And all the people
when they heard, and the publicans, justified God, being
baptized with the baptism of John. 30 But the Pharisees
and the lawyers rejected for themselves the counsel of God,
being not baptized of him. 31 Whereunto then shall I liken
the men of this generation, and to what are they like? 32
They are like unto children that sit in the marketplace, and
call one to another; who say, We piped unto you, and ye did
not dance; we wailed, and ye did not weep. 33 For John
the Baptist is came eating no bread nor drinking wine; and
ye say, He hath a demon. 34 The Son of man is come
eating and drinking; and ye say, Behold, a gluttonous man,
and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and sinners! 35
And wisdom is justified of all her children.
</quote>

<p>
Due to the darkness of his dungeon or to the long delay
of Jesus in fulfilling his cherished hopes, the mind of John
the Baptist became clouded with doubt and he sent messengers
to Jesus to ask whether or not he was really the
Messiah whom John had declared him to be, <q>Art thou he
that cometh, or look we for another?</q> John had not lost
faith in God or in his promises; he believed that if Jesus
were not the Messiah, the Messiah was still to come.
</p>

<p>
The Master lovingly reassured his great herald by sending
back the report of the mighty works which he was accomplishing.
John was already familiar with these acts
but the recital must have dispelled his fears. Jesus sympathizes
with us also in our hours of darkness, but his relief
usually consists in reminding us of facts we already know
concerning his power and love and presence and the truths
of his written Word.
</p>

<p>
Jesus, however, does not praise us for our doubts; he sent
to John a gentle and loving rebuke: <q>And blessed is he,
whosoever shall find no occasion of stumbling in me.</q>
This benediction he pronounces upon all who in spite of
darkness, imprisonment, delay, and mystery still confidently
put their trust in him.
</p>

<p>
It was upon this occasion when John seems to have failed
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
that Jesus pronounced upon him unparalleled praise, declaring
that <q>among them that are born of women there is
none greater than John.</q> He vindicated this deliberate
judgment and thereby, showed wherein true greatness lies.
He spoke first of the character of John and then of his career.
He praised the man and then the messenger. He
described his moral and then his official greatness.
</p>

<p>
His expression as to the character of John is voiced by
two questions, to each of which a negative answer of course
must be given: first, <q>What went ye out into the wilderness
to behold? a reed shaken with the wind?</q> Surely
true greatness does not lie in the moral cowardice which
bends before every breeze; quite on the contrary, John was
like a rock which no storm could move.
</p>

<p>
Then there was a second question: <q>What went ye out to
see? a man clothed in soft raiment?</q> Surely greatness
does not lie along the line of self-gratification and indulgence.
John endured all hardships and was oblivious to
all human delights because he was so devoted to his divine
task. Courage and consecration&mdash;these constitute prime
factors in moral greatness.
</p>

<p>
The real greatness of John consisted, however, in his mission.
Jesus declared that he was the messenger whom
Malachi had predicted should prepare the way of the Lord.
Other prophets had appeared and had predicted the coming
of the Messiah. It was given to John not only to declare
that the Christ would come, but to point to him and
to say, <q>Behold, the Lamb of God! ... this is the Son of
God.</q> No greater dignity had ever been conferred upon a
human soul; and no higher privilege can now be enjoyed
than that of turning the thoughts and hearts of men to
Jesus Christ, the Saviour of the world. The present followers
of Christ have a larger knowledge of him than was
possessed by John. What their relative positions will be in
the glory of the perfected Kingdom will depend upon
the comparative faithfulness with which they serve their
Master.
</p>

<p>
The praise of John is sharply contrasted with the condemnation
of the Pharisees which Jesus now turned to express.
He declared that these professed leaders were like
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
children sitting in the market place, complaining one to
another that they are willing to play neither at mock funerals
nor at mock weddings, for when John came they refused
to follow him because his aspect and message were too
severe, and when Christ came they criticized him as being
too genial, <q>a friend of publicans and sinners.</q> The
trouble with the Pharisees was that they made an excuse of
the demeanor of John and the conduct of Jesus for refusing
what was essential in their mission and message. They
were unwilling to repent at the command of John or to put
their trust in Christ in response to his promise of grace and
life. Thus some men are still refusing to accept the salvation
which is offered because of something in Christianity
which is purely external, while they fail to appreciate
its true essence; but there were those in the days of Jesus,
and there are those to-day who are willing to accept both
the call to repentance and the offer of life, <q>And wisdom is
justified of all her children.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>6. A Sinful Woman Forgiven. Ch. 7:36-50</head>

<quote rend="display">
36 And one of the Pharisees desired him that he would
eat with him. And he entered into the Pharisee's house, and
sat down to meat. 37 And behold, a woman who was in the
city, a sinner; and when she knew that he was sitting at
meat in the Pharisee's house, she brought an alabaster
cruse of ointment, 38 and standing behind at his feet, weeping,
she began to wet his feet with her tears, and wiped
them with the hair of her head, and kissed his feet, and
anointed them with ointment. 39 Now when the Pharisee
that had bidden him saw it, he spake within himself, saying,
This man, if he were a prophet, would have perceived who and
what manner of woman this is that toucheth him, that she is
a sinner. 40 And Jesus answering said unto him, Simon,
I have somewhat to say unto thee. And he saith, Teacher,
say on. 41 A certain lender had two debtors: the one owed
five hundred shillings, and the other fifty. 42 When they
had not <hi rend='italic'>wherewith</hi> to pay, he forgave them both. Which
of them therefore will love him most? 43 Simon answered
and said, He, I suppose, to whom he forgave the most. And
he said unto him, Thou hast rightly judged. 44 And turning
to the woman, he said unto Simon, Seest thou this woman?
I entered into thy house, thou gavest me no water for my feet:
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
but she hath wetted my feet with her tears, and wiped them
with her hair. 45 Thou gavest me no kiss: but she, since
the time I came in, hath not ceased to kiss my feet. 46 My
head with oil thou didst not anoint: but she hath anointed my
feet with ointment. 47 Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins,
which are many, are forgiven; for she loved much: but to
whom little is forgiven, <hi rend='italic'>the same</hi> loveth little. 48 And he
said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven. 49 And they that sat
at meat with him began to say within themselves, Who is
this that even forgiveth sins? 50 And he said unto the
woman, Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace.
</quote>

<p>
The Gospel of Luke appears to place special emphasis
upon the grace and forgiveness manifested by Jesus. It
alone records his sympathy with the sorrowing widow of
Nain, and it is also alone in expressing the sympathy which
Jesus felt for the sinful woman who anointed his feet in the
house of Simon, the Pharisee. It is a picture, however,
not only of the loving mercy of our Lord, but of the unbounded
gratitude felt by one who truly appreciated the
priceless gift of his pardoning grace.
</p>

<p>
By an unfortunate error of interpretation this woman
has been confused with Mary of Magdala or with Mary of
Bethany. These three persons should be, however, absolutely
distinct. It is true that Jesus delivered the first of
these from demoniac possession, and that the second, like
the woman in this story, anointed his feet with perfume, but
there is every reason for believing that of the three only
this woman was reputed to be a sinner. She seems to have
met Jesus on some previous occasion, to have repented of
her sins, and to have received from the Lord his word of forgiveness.
</p>

<p>
It was her gratitude which gave her courage to enter
unbidden into the house of Simon, where Jesus was being entertained
as a guest. She had come to anoint his feet but
as she beheld him, she thought again of her sins and her hot
tears of penitence fell upon the feet of her Lord. She hastily
unbound her hair and with it dried his feet and then
poured upon them a flask of fragrant ointment. No truer
expression could have been given to her gratitude and passionate
devotion. The fact that Jesus allowed a woman of
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
such notorious character to express her love for him made
Simon conclude that Jesus could not be a prophet, for
otherwise he would have been able to discern the nature of
so depraved a woman.
</p>

<p>
By his reply Jesus showed his ability to read even the
secret thoughts of his host. The words of Jesus not only
answered the silent criticism of Simon but also rebuked him
for his own impenitence and lack of faith. Jesus proposed
to his host a parable of two forgiven debtors, illustrating
the fact that gratitude depends upon the realization of the
amount which has been forgiven, and then he applied this
principle to Simon and to the woman whom Simon had
been regarding with scorn. Jesus showed how keenly he
had felt the lack of love shown him by his host, and he contrasted
it with the affection shown by the woman. When
he had entered the house Simon had neglected the customary
service of providing a bath for his feet; the woman had
washed his feet with her tears. Simon had withheld the
kiss with which a host usually welcomed his guests; the
woman had passionately kissed his feet. Simon had not
furnished the perfume with which it was usual to anoint an
honored guest; the woman had come to the house with the
special purpose of pouring fragrant oil upon the feet of her
Lord.
</p>

<p>
In view of the parable the message of Jesus is plain,
<q>Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins, which are many, are
forgiven; for she loved much; but to whom little is forgiven,
the same loveth little.</q> Jesus did not mean to say that
until now she had not been pardoned, nor yet that her
pardon was conditioned upon her love. He meant that her
love resulted from her pardon, and his words have been
rightfully interpreted thus: <q>I say unto thee that her many
sins are forgiven, as thou mayest infer from this exhibition
of her love.</q> The remainder of the sentence was devoted
to Simon, <q>To whom little is forgiven, the same loveth
little.</q> The words do not prove that Simon had been pardoned;
they rather indicate that his lack of love had proved
his lack of penitence and so of forgiveness. Jesus then
turned to the woman with a word of benediction: <q>Thy
sins are forgiven.</q> He thus assured her of the pardon
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
previously granted, but still more he vindicated her in the
eyes of the guests and assured them of the new life upon
which the woman already had entered. They marveled as
they heard him pronouncing pardon. That is a divine
function; but the ideal Man whose sympathy Luke records
was likewise the Son of God. Last of all, Jesus turned to
the woman with the final word of blessing: <q>Thy faith hath
saved thee; go in peace.</q> This is a clear statement of the
fact that faith had secured pardon and pardon had awakened
gratitude and gratitude had been expressed by a deed
of devoted love. Such a penitent can rightfully go away
<q>into peace,</q> that is, to its present and continual enjoyment.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>7. The Ministering Women. Ch. 8:1-3</head>

<quote rend="display">
1 And it came to pass soon afterwards, that he went
about through cities and villages, preaching and bringing the
good tidings of the kingdom of God, and with him the twelve,
2 and certain women who had been healed of evil spirits and
infirmities: Mary that was called Magdalene, from whom
seven demons had gone out, 3 and Joanna the wife of Chuzas
Herod's steward, and Susanna, and many others, who
ministered unto them of their substance.
</quote>

<p>
Luke writes the Gospel of womanhood. He alone records
those tender incidents in the lives of Elisabeth, Mary,
and Anna which are associated with the infancy of Jesus;
he alone tells us of the widow of Nain whose son Jesus restored
to life; of the woman bowed down by Satan but relieved
by Jesus; of the penitent sinner who anointed his
feet; of the domestic scene in the home of Mary and Martha;
of the woman who congratulated the mother of Jesus;
and of the women who condoled with him on his way to the
cross. Perhaps most significant of all is the statement of
Luke that as Jesus and his apostles moved about Galilee
preaching the gospel, they were attended by a company of
women <q>who ministered unto them of their substance.</q>
</p>

<p>
Among these women Luke mentions <q>Mary that was
called Magdalene,</q> probably so designated from the town
of Magdala where formerly she had lived. By this title
she was distinguished from Mary the mother of Jesus, from
Mary of Bethany, and from other women of this same name.
</p>

<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>

<p>
It is a cruel error to confuse her with the sinful woman of
whom Luke has just been writing. Mary had suffered
from demon possession, as here stated, but there is nothing
in the Gospels to indicate that she had ever been a woman
of notoriously evil life.
</p>

<p>
Luke also mentions Joanna, whose husband, Chuzas, had
charge of the household and personal estates of King Herod,
evidently then a woman of some social standing; but of her
and her companions nothing further is known, excepting
this important fact, that their motive in ministering to the
Master was that of gratitude; they <q>had been healed of evil
spirits and infirmities.</q>
</p>

<p>
This statement by Luke is brief but illuminating. It
throws light upon an interesting question to which no other
answer is given in the Gospels: How did Jesus and his followers
secure financial support during the years of his ministry?
Evidently those who had received from him spiritual
help gladly supplied his temporal wants and rendered to
him all needful service. Thus this passage indicates not
only what Jesus did for women, but what women did for
him. It suggests a question: Who can estimate how far
the gifts and sacrifices of grateful women have been making
possible, through the passing ages, the preaching of the
gospel in all the world?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>8. The Parable of the Sower. Ch. 8:4-18</head>

<quote rend="display">
4 And when a great multitude came together, and they
of every city resorted unto him, he spake by a parable: 5 The
sower went forth to sow his seed: and as he sowed, some
fell by the way side; and it was trodden under foot, and the
birds of the heaven devoured it. 6 And other fell on the rock;
and as soon as it grew, it withered away, because it had no
moisture. 7 And other fell amidst the thorns; and the
thorns grew with it, and choked it. 8 And other fell into the
good ground, and grew, and brought forth fruit a hundredfold.
As he said these things, he cried, He that hath ears to hear,
let him hear.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
9 And his disciples asked him what this parable might be.
10 And he said, Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of
the kingdom of God: but to the rest in parables; that seeing
they may not see, and hearing they may not understand.
</quote>

<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>

<quote rend="display">
11 Now the parable is this: The seed is the word of God.
12 And those by the way side are they that have heard; then
cometh the devil, and taketh away the word from their
heart, that they may not believe and be saved. 13 And
those on the rock <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> they who, when they have heard,
receive the word with joy; and these have no root, who for
a while believe, and in time of temptation fall away. 14 And
that which fell among the thorns, these are they that have
heard, and as they go on their way they are choked with
cares and riches and pleasures of <hi rend='italic'>this</hi> life, and bring no
fruit to perfection. 15 And that in the good ground, these
are such as in an honest and good heart, having heard the
word, hold it fast, and bring forth fruit with patience.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
16 And no man, when he hath lighted a lamp, covereth it
with a vessel, or putteth it under a bed; but putteth it on a
stand, that they that enter in may see the light. 17 For
nothing is hid, that shall not be made manifest; nor <hi rend='italic'>anything</hi>
secret, that shall not be known and come to light. 18 Take
heed therefore how ye hear: for whosoever hath, to him shall
be given; and whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken
away even that which he thinketh he hath.
</quote>

<p>
Because of its greater length and more elaborate workmanship
and greater fullness of detail, this story of the
sower is rightly regarded as the first parable of our Lord,
even though he had previously used brief illustrations
which were designated by the same name. Parables
henceforth formed a prominent part of his teaching, and
that he was now beginning a somewhat new method of
instruction is evident from the fact that the disciples now
asked him to explain his meaning, v. 9, and from the fact
that he here gave the reason for the use of all his parables.
This reason is twofold: these inimitable illustrations would
enable those who were attentive and rightly disposed toward
him to remember more easily the teachings of the
Master; while to inattentive or hostile minds the meaning
would be veiled. V. 10. This twofold purpose met the
demands of the crisis which had arisen, due on the one hand
to the increasing popularity of Jesus' teachings and on the
other to the murderous hatred and dark plots of the Pharisees
and scribes.
</p>

<p>
The parable of the Sower thus forms a proper introduction
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
to all the parables for they are vehicles of truth, and
our Lord here made it clear that the effect of truth depends
upon the spiritual state of the hearers. This is sometimes
called the parable of the Soils, for it illustrates the various
states of heart found among men to whom the Christian
message comes.
</p>

<p>
In some cases <q>the word of God,</q> whether preached by
Christ or by his followers, falls on hearts which are pictured
by the hard-trodden footpath which runs through the field
of grain. No possible impression can be made. The Word
finds no entrance and Satan snatches it away as a bird
picks up the grain which falls by the wayside. Faith and
salvation cannot result.
</p>

<p>
Other hearers are compared to the thin layer of earth
which covers a ledge of stone. Seed which falls into such
soil springs up most quickly because warmed by the underlying
rock; but as the roots cannot strike downward, the
grain soon withers beneath the scorching sun. So there
are hearers who receive with joy the message of life, but
when subjected to the persecution and trials which
followers of Christ must endure, they quickly desert his
cause.
</p>

<p>
Other hearers are compared to seed which falls where
thorns are growing. This seed springs into life but it has
not room for development. It is robbed by the thorns of
its needed nourishment. Thus some Christians are so preoccupied
by <q>cares and riches and pleasures</q> that they can
bear no spiritual fruit.
</p>

<p>
There are those, however, who are like seed which fell
on <q>good ground</q> and <q>brought forth fruit a hundredfold;</q>
they receive the truth <q>in an honest and good heart</q> and
patiently and perseveringly they produce in their lives a
golden harvest of grain.
</p>

<p>
The great message of the parable is summarized in the
words of our Lord, <q>Take heed therefore how ye hear.</q> V.
18. The purpose of his parables, as of all his teachings,
was to give spiritual light. Those who love him and obey
his word will have their understanding quickened and their
knowledge increased; but one who is careless or disobedient
to the truth, will lose <q>even that which he thinketh he
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
hath.</q> It is a great privilege to hear the gospel of Christ,
but it involves a great responsibility as well.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>9. Kinship with Jesus. Ch. 8:19-21</head>

<quote rend="display">
19 And there came to him his mother and brethren, and
they could not come at him for the crowd. 20 And it was
told him, Thy mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring
to see thee. 21 But he answered and said unto them, My
mother and my brethren are these that hear the word of
God, and do it.
</quote>

<p>
It is only from the other Gospels that we learn the exact
nature and purpose of the visit paid to Jesus by his mother
and brethren. Luke does not reveal the fact that it occasioned
one of the most delicate and difficult dilemmas by
which our Lord was ever confronted. The real purpose of
these relatives was to interrupt his work. They feared that
his mind was unbalanced and they wished to take him home.
Should Jesus repudiate them, or should he allow his work
needlessly to be interrupted? This situation Luke does
not sketch, but he does state clearly the impressive message
which Jesus found occasion to deliver. When Jesus was
told that these relatives desired to see him, he pointed to his
disciples with the reply, <q>My mother and my brethren are
these that hear the word of God, and do it.</q> Thus Luke
connects this incident with the parable of the Sower which
he has just related. The parable shows the need of careful
attention to the gospel truth, and, according to Luke's account
of this incident, the same fact is emphasized, namely,
the blessed result of heeding the divine Word. According
to the statement of Christ, such obedience to him and
such true discipleship as was shown by his followers results
in a relationship with him more intimate and close than is
secured by any human ties. This spiritual kinship is more
vital than any relationship of blood or of nature. It results
in a fellowship, at once blessed and forever abiding,
which is possible for all. The reply of our Lord could not
have offended his brethren even though it did contain a
delicate rebuke. Only those have a right to claim relationship
with him who submit to him as their Lord and are
ready to do his will.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>10. Jesus Stilling the Storm. Ch. 8:22-25</head>

<quote rend="display">
22 Now it came to pass on one of those days, that he
entered into a boat, himself and his disciples; and he said
unto them, Let us go over unto the other side of the lake:
and they launched forth. 23 But as they sailed he fell
asleep: and there came down a storm of wind on the lake; and
they were filling <hi rend='italic'>with water</hi>, and were in jeopardy. 24 And
they came to him, and awoke him, saying, Master, master,
we perish. And he awoke, and rebuked the wind and the
raging of the water: and they ceased, and there was a calm.
25 And he said unto them, Where is your faith? And being
afraid they marvelled, saying one to another, Who then is
this, that he commandeth even the winds and the water,
and they obey him?
</quote>

<p>
Storms were common on the surface of the little lake
which Jesus so often crossed with his disciples; and storms
are still frequent in the lives of his followers. To accompany
the Master does not exempt us from struggles and
tempests, from dark skies and angry waves. This, however,
was no usual storm. Even the sturdy fishermen of
Galilee, who were familiar with all the changeful moods of
that inland sea, were filled with terror. Jesus at the time
was quietly resting and had fallen asleep in what seemed to
his followers to be an hour of greatest peril.
</p>

<p>
Their fear may have been foolish but it was wise in
them to come to the Master in their moment of pressing
need. They awoke him with the cry, <q>Master, master, we
perish.</q> The followers of Christ are not saved from encountering
storms but in the hour of peril they should be
comforted by his presence and they can ever turn to him
for relief. <q>He awoke, and rebuked the wind and the
raging of the water: and they ceased, and there was a
calm.</q> Then when he had rebuked the disordered elements
Jesus turned to rebuke his followers, <q>Where is
your faith?</q> He did not find fault with them for awakening
him, or for crying out for help; he rebuked only their
lack of trust which should have relieved them from distress
of mind while he was so near and so abundantly
able to save. Such a miracle must have strengthened
their faith but its first effect was to fill them with wonder
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
and with awe. Every new manifestation of his power
came as a surprise to these disciples, and now for the first
time they saw his control over the blind forces of nature;
thus once again they felt themselves in the presence not
only of a perfect Man&mdash;but of One who was divine.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>11. A Demoniac Healed. Ch. 8:26-39</head>

<quote rend="display">
26 And they arrived at the country of the Gerasenes,
which is over against Galilee. 27 And when he was come
forth upon the land, there met him a certain man out of the
city, who had demons; and for a long time he had worn no
clothes, and abode not in <hi rend='italic'>any</hi> house, but in the tombs. 28
And when he saw Jesus, he cried out, and fell down before
him, and with a loud voice said, What have I to do with thee,
Jesus, thou Son of the Most High God? I beseech thee,
torment me not. 29 For he was commanding the unclean
spirit to come out from the man. For often-times it had
seized him: and he was kept under guard, and bound with
chains and fetters; and breaking the bands asunder, he was
driven of the demon into the desert. 30 And Jesus asked
him, What is thy name? And he said, Legion; for many
demons were entered into him. 31 And they entreated him
that he would not command them to depart into the abyss.
32 Now there was there a herd of many swine feeding on the
mountain: and they entreated him that he would give them
leave to enter into them. And he gave them leave. 33 And
the demons came out from the man, and entered into the
swine: and the herd rushed down the steep into the lake,
and were drowned. 34 And when they that fed them saw
what had come to pass, they fled, and told it in the city and
in the country. 35 And they went out to see what had
come to pass; and they came to Jesus, and found the man,
from whom the demons were gone out, sitting, clothed and
in his right mind, at the feet of Jesus: and they were afraid.
36 And they that saw it told them how he that was possessed
with demons was made whole. 37 And all the people of the
country of the Gerasenes round about asked him to depart
from them; for they were holden with great fear: and he
entered into a boat, and returned. 38 But the man from
whom the demons were gone out prayed him that he might be
with him: but he sent him away, saying, 39 Return to thy
house, and declare how great things God hath done for thee.
And he went his way, publishing throughout the whole city
how great things Jesus had done for him.
</quote>

<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>

<p>
The sufferings of a demoniac were so similar to those of
mental disease that by many they are regarded as identical.
Those who observe the distinction are faced with a
further problem as to whether demon possession exists at
the present day. What is most important of all is to note
the exact parallel existing between the demoniacs described
in the New Testament and those persons who at all times
are tormented by envy and lust and anger and greed and
other evil passions which dominate the human soul.
</p>

<p>
On the eastern shore of the Lake of Gennesaret Jesus
was encountered by a man whose suffering and nakedness
are types of the anguish and shamelessness of sin. He
could not be controlled; he was dwelling among the tombs,
and these, too, are pictures of the helplessness and loneliness
and hopelessness which evil passions produce. Most
of all it is interesting to note that while the demon cried
out in dread, the man drew near to Jesus, really hoping
for help. The experience was like that of those who suffer
from mental disease where a dual consciousness is manifested.
Likewise most of us have experienced such a conflict
of desires; we have longed for liberty at the very
moment when we have felt the controlling power of some
passion. Some tell us that we must cease to love the sin
before Christ will give us help, but this picture sketched
by Luke gives a more hopeful message. It intimates that
as we cry out for relief, or even before we speak, Jesus sees
the heart and recognizes the longing and assures release.
</p>

<p>
Jesus asked the sufferer for his name. He wished the
real man to be awakened and to be conscious of the distinction
between himself and the evil spirit by which he
was possessed. The reply of the demoniac was full of
pathos. He declared that his name was <q>Legion,</q> the
reason assigned being that <q>many demons were entered
into him.</q> His case was particularly desperate; but the
evil spirits realized that they stood before One whose
power was absolute. Certain that they were to be expelled
from the sufferer, they asked permission to enter into
a herd of swine which was feeding on the mountain side.
A question has often been raised as to why Jesus granted
this request. Probably one reason was that the sight
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
which followed assured the sufferer of his cure; another
may have been that the destruction of the herd would
give to the men of the region an arresting message both
of their own peril and of the power of Christ. However,
when <q>They went out to see what had come to pass,</q> they
were full of terror and they requested Jesus to leave their
land. They were evidently more concerned for the beasts
which had been lost than for the soul that had been saved,
when they saw their countryman sitting clothed and in
his right mind as a disciple at the feet of Jesus. Their request
was granted; our Lord never continues the gracious
manifestations of his presence when these are not desired.
However, he refused the request of the man whom he had
healed. The latter wished to accompany Jesus as he
entered the boat to cross to the other side of the lake;
but Jesus bade him to remain as a witness for Christ in
his own home and among his own people. It is ever the
desire of the Master that the testimony of those who have
known his power should be given first to those by whom
they are best known.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>12. The Daughter of Jairus and the Woman with an Issue of Blood.
Ch. 8:40-56</head>

<quote rend="display">
40 And as Jesus returned, the multitude welcomed him;
for they were all waiting for him. 41 And behold, there came
a man named Jairus, and he was a ruler of the synagogue:
and he fell down at Jesus' feet, and besought him to come
into his house; 42 for he had an only daughter, about twelve
years of age, and she was dying. But as he went the multitudes
thronged him.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
43 And a woman having an issue of blood twelve years,
who had spent all her living upon physicians, and could not be
healed of any, 44 came behind him, and touched the border
of his garment: and immediately the issue of her blood
stanched. 45 And Jesus said, Who is it that touched me?
And when all denied, Peter said, and they that were with him,
Master, the multitudes press thee and crush <hi rend='italic'>thee</hi>. 46 But
Jesus said, Some one did touch me; for I perceived that
power had gone forth from me. 47 And when the woman
saw that she was not hid, she came trembling, and falling
down before him declared in the presence of all the people
for what cause she touched him, and how she was healed
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
immediately. 48 And he said unto her, Daughter, thy faith
hath made thee whole; go in peace.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
49 While he yet spake, there cometh one from the ruler
of the synagogue's <hi rend='italic'>house</hi>, saying, Thy daughter is dead;
trouble not the Teacher. 50 But Jesus hearing it, answered
him, Fear not: only believe, and she shall be made whole.
51 And when he came to the house, he suffered not any man
to enter in with him, save Peter, and John, and James, and
the father of the maiden and her mother. 52 And all were
weeping, and bewailing her: but he said, Weep not; for she
is not dead, but sleepeth. 53 And they laughed him to scorn,
knowing that she was dead. 54 But he, taking her by the
hand, called, saying, Maiden, arise. 55 And her spirit returned,
and she rose up immediately: and he commanded
that <hi rend='italic'>something</hi> be given her to eat. 56 And her parents were
amazed: but he charged them to tell no man what had
been done.
</quote>

<p>
As Jesus returned to Capernaum after curing the demoniac
across the lake, he was welcomed by a great multitude
in the midst of which were two sufferers for whom
the Saviour showed his sympathy as he perfected their
faith and relieved their distress. They were strangely
contrasted in circumstances, alike only in their desperate
need. One was Jairus, a man of prominence in his community,
<q>a ruler of the synagogue,</q> a person of comparative
wealth and power and social position, whose home
for twelve years had been brightened by the presence of
a little daughter, an only child, who was now lying at the
point of death.
</p>

<p>
The other was a woman, poor, weak, ceremonially unclean,
friendless, who for twelve years had been suffering
from an incurable disease and who knew that by no human
power could her life be prolonged.
</p>

<p>
As Jesus was starting for the home of Jairus this woman
came up behind him, touched the border of his garment,
and was instantly healed. Her faith was imperfect but
it was real. She had supposed the power of Christ to be
merely magical and mechanical. Jesus showed that it
is inseparable from divine knowledge and love. He had
felt the touch of her trembling finger. He had distinguished
it from the press of the jostling throng; and now
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
for her own sake he required the woman <q>in the presence
of all the people</q> to acknowledge her cure. Jesus would
have us know that faith is a dependence upon his gracious
person and purpose, and also that only after public confession
of our relation to him can we receive the assurance
that we are saved and can hear his blessed word, <q>Thy
faith hath made thee whole; go in peace.</q>
</p>

<p>
The faith of Jairus was likewise imperfect. It was more
intelligent than the faith of the woman but it fell short of
that revealed by the centurion in the same city who felt
it unnecessary for Jesus to come to his house but only to
speak a word and a cure would be effected. Nevertheless
this faith was genuine and so Jesus strengthened it and
rewarded it. The very fact that Jesus started toward
his home was reassuring to the father, but his faith was
tested by the delay caused in curing the woman. However,
it was also strengthened by this proof of divine
wisdom and power. Most terribly was his faith tested by
the message which then reached him, <q>Thy daughter is
dead; trouble not the Teacher.</q> Yet again, it was confirmed
by the word of Jesus, <q>Fear not: only believe, and
she shall be made whole.</q> As he entered the house, Jesus
spoke another word which rebuked the faithless mourners
and cheered the agonized parents, <q>Weep not; for she is
not dead, but sleepeth.</q> He meant that in his presence
and in virtue of his power death loses its reality and is
robbed of its victory. Nor has the word lost its meaning
and its comfort for the followers of Christ during all the
subsequent years.
</p>

<p>
Jesus showed clearly what he meant as he took into the
death chamber his three closest friends and the two trembling
parents, as he stood before the sleeping child and
<q>taking her by the hand, called, saying Maiden, arise.
And her spirit returned, and she rose up immediately:
and he commanded that something be given her to eat.</q>
The record indicates the supreme thoughtfulness and
tenderness of the Master. He took with him only three
disciples for he would not have the awakened child terrified
by the sight of more strangers. When the miracle
had been performed he requested that the little girl
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
should be given food; this was for her own comfort but
also to break for the parents the spell of awe and terror
which had been cast upon them by the presence of death,
and also as a proof not only that life had returned but
also that complete recovery from disease had been secured.
One other command is recorded, <q>He charged
them to tell no man what had been done.</q> The three
disciples would be competent witnesses of the miracle but
a widespread report by the parents and their friends might
arouse such an outburst of excitement as to interrupt his
work and precipitate a crisis before the earthly ministry
of our Lord was complete.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>D. The Fourth Period. Ch. 9:1-50</head>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>1. The Mission of the Twelve. Ch. 9:1-9</head>

<quote rend="display">
1 And he called the twelve together, and gave them power
and authority over all demons, and to cure diseases. 2 And
he sent them forth to preach the kingdom of God, and to
heal the sick. 3 And he said unto them, Take nothing for
your journey, neither staff, nor wallet, nor bread, nor money;
neither have two coats. 4 And into whatsoever house ye
enter, there abide, and thence depart. 5 And as many as
receive you not, when ye depart from that city, shake off the
dust from your feet for a testimony against them. 6 And
they departed, and went throughout the villages, preaching
the gospel, and healing everywhere.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
7 Now Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was done: and
he was much perplexed, because that it was said by some,
that John was risen from the dead; 8 and by some, that
Elijah had appeared; and by others, that one of the old
prophets was risen again. 9 And Herod said, John I beheaded:
but who is this, about whom I hear such things? And he
sought to see him.
</quote>

<p>
As Jesus sent forth his twelve disciples on their first
mission he was entering the closing period of his ministry
in Galilee. Until now the apostles had been his companions;
henceforth they were to be more strictly messengers
and representatives. Jesus foresaw his approaching
rejection and death, but before leaving for Jerusalem
and the cross he wished to offer himself once more to the
people of Galilee among whom he had long been laboring;
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
and for this purpose he sent out the Twelve. Their circumstances
and the directions given them by Jesus were
peculiar to the time and occasion. However, these commands
are not without application to the messengers of
the Master in all ages of the world. They were given
<q>power and authority over all demons, and to cure diseases.</q>
Such miraculous gifts were limited to their own
day and were designed as credentials of their mission. It
is true, however, that those who represent Christ must
ever be concerned for the mental and physical conditions
of mankind, even though the great purpose is to bring a
message of spiritual import. The latter was, of course,
the great purpose of the apostles. They went forth <q>to
preach the kingdom of God,</q> as well as <q>to heal the sick.</q>
</p>

<p>
When Christ commanded the disciples to take nothing
for their journey, he did not intend to impose needless
hardships or even to suggest peculiar denial. He rather
intimated the principle that his heralds must not be encumbered
with worldly cares and burdens and that those
who proclaim his gospel may expect to be supported by
those to whom the message is preached.
</p>

<p>
In advising the disciples to remain in the first home
where they were properly received, he indicated the wisdom
of having a fixed center for their work, of being content
with their entertainment and surroundings, and of
avoiding social complications which might hinder their
work. They were instructed, in case they were not received
and welcomed as the messengers of Christ, to show
their just displeasure as they departed from the place, by
shaking off the dust from their feet, an Oriental custom
which in this case indicated the disavowal of any possible
relationship with the enemies of their Lord.
</p>

<p>
<q>And they departed, and went throughout the villages,
preaching the gospel, and healing everywhere.</q> These
were the supreme representatives of the great band of
heroes who have continued the work and have made known
their message in all times and lands. They were prepared
by the divine instruction of their Master. It has been
said that there is something greater than preaching; it is
to prepare preachers. Surely none were ever so trained
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
and none ever accomplished their work so well; but it is
possible for every follower of Christ to have some part in
making known the gospel of his grace.
</p>

<p>
The great success of the disciples and the tremendous
excitement produced by their mission is indicated by the
fact that the reports of their work reached Herod the king
and made him tremble on his throne. It was not that he
feared what Jesus might do; it was rather because there
was something in the rumor which awakened his sleeping
conscience and filled him with a secret alarm and dread.
<q>It was said by some, that John was risen from the dead.</q>
Herod had beheaded John, but the memory of his foul deed
could not be buried; now he was wondering what might
be the real nature of the miracles which were being reported
and of the Man in whose name they were wrought.
He <q>sought to see</q> Jesus. That was mere curiosity. He
probably wished to see some miracles performed. Before
long an opportunity was to be given him to stand face to
face with the divine Man, but it was to be on an unexpected
occasion when the latter would stand before him
as a prisoner, when Herod might offer him protection or
release; but when the occasion came he was disappointed
by the silence of the Lord and allowed him to go away to
crucifixion and death. One who beheaded John need not
have hoped to understand Jesus. One who violates his
own conscience to-day and refuses solemn warnings to
repent, need not expect that Christ will be revealed to
him in his beauty and grace and saving power.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>2. The Five Thousand Fed. Ch. 9:10-17</head>

<quote rend="display">
10 And the apostles, when they were returned, declared
unto him what things they had done. And he took them, and
withdrew apart to a city called Bethsaida. 11 But the multitudes
perceiving it followed him: and he welcomed them,
and spake to them of the kingdom of God, and them that had
need of healing he cured. 12 And the day began to wear
away; and the twelve came, and said unto him, Send the
multitude away, that they may go into the villages and country
round about, and lodge, and get provisions: for we are here
in a desert place. 13 But he said unto them, Give ye them
to eat. And they said, We have no more than five loaves and
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
two fishes; except we should go and buy food for all this
people. 14 For they were about five thousand men. And
he said unto his disciples, Make them sit down in companies,
about fifty each. 15 And they did so, and made them all sit
down. 16 And he took the five loaves and the two fishes,
and looking up to heaven, he blessed them, and brake; and
gave to the disciples to set before the multitude. 17 And they
ate, and were all filled: and there was taken up that which
remained over to them of broken pieces, twelve baskets.
</quote>

<p>
The feeding of the five thousand is the only miracle recorded
by all four evangelists, in fact the only incident of
the Galilæan ministry of our Lord common to them all.
Here this ministry attains its climax. This was the hour
of the greatest popularity of Jesus; the multitudes would
have offered him a crown, but he saw before him the
shadow of the cross.
</p>

<p>
The Twelve had returned weary with labor but elated
by success. Jesus desired for them a season of retirement,
of rest, and instruction. They withdrew to a secluded
place beyond Bethsaida on the east shore of the lake; but
there they were discovered by the eager multitudes.
Jesus showed his infinite sympathy by cordially welcoming
the crowds which had intruded upon his privacy and
interrupted his plans; he gladdened their hearts with the
gospel message and healed their diseases. And as the day
declined he pitied their hunger and met their needs by
miraculously multiplying five loaves and two fishes which
the disciples had secured.
</p>

<p>
For the disciples of to-day there are serious messages
in this familiar story; perhaps none is more obvious than
that of the measureless compassion of Christ. With
something of his sympathy we should look upon the multitudes
perishing for lack of physical and spiritual food.
Their call for help should not be regarded as an interruption
but as a guide in shaping our personal plans. While
of ourselves we are unable to give relief, yet if our all is
offered to the Master, it will be multiplied marvelously
by his divine power. The miracle seems to have been
wrought as Jesus looked up in prayer. We must surely
look to him and seek his blessing in our service. We must
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
allow no broken fragments to be lost; some families could
live on what other families waste; then, too, the followers
of Christ must learn a true economy of time and talents
and wealth if the Bread of life is to be brought to a famishing
world.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>3. Jesus Predicting his Death. Ch. 9:18-27</head>

<quote rend="display">
18 And it came to pass, as he was praying apart, the disciples
were with him: and he asked them, saying, Who do the
multitudes say that I am? 19 And they answering said,
John the Baptist; but others <hi rend='italic'>say</hi>, Elijah; and others, that
one of the old prophets is risen again. 20 And he said unto
them, But who say ye that I am? And Peter answering said,
The Christ of God. 21 But he charged them, and commanded
<hi rend='italic'>them</hi> to tell this to no man; 22 saying, The Son of man must
suffer many things, and be rejected of the elders and chief
priests and scribes, and be killed, and the third day be raised
up. 23 And he said unto all, If any man would come after me
let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me.
24 for whosoever would save his life shall lose it; but whosoever
shall lose his life for my sake, the same shall save it.
25 For what is a man profited, if he gain the whole world, and
lose or forfeit his own self? 26 For whosoever shall be
ashamed of me and of my words, of him shall the Son of man
be ashamed, when he cometh in his own glory, and <hi rend='italic'>the glory</hi>
of the Father, and of the holy angels. 27 But I tell you of a
truth, There are some of them that stand here, who shall in
no wise taste of death, till they see the kingdom of God.
</quote>

<p>
The first clear prediction of his death was made by
Jesus directly after he had heard the famous confession of
Peter. The latter was occasioned by a question Jesus himself
had asked, <q>Who do the multitudes say that I am?</q>
The answer is exactly that given by multitudes in modern
days, <q>And they answering said, John the Baptist; but
others say, Elijah; and others, that one of the old prophets
is risen again;</q> that is to say, a reformer, a great preacher,
a messenger of God. Such an estimate of himself never
satisfied our Lord and so he asked pointedly: <q>But who
say ye that I am? And Peter answering said, The
Christ of God.</q> This is the great affirmation concerning
Christ which the world to-day needs to hear; but at that
time Jesus earnestly commanded his disciples to <q>tell this
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
to no man.</q> The message would then have been misunderstood
and the disciples themselves needed first to
learn the truth concerning the death and resurrection of
Jesus. No man to-day is qualified to testify for Christ
who does not know the meaning of his atoning death and
<q>the power of his resurrection.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then Jesus told his disciples of the absolute necessity
of his approaching sufferings and assured them that on
the third day he would be raised up. This prediction of
death must have astonished the disciples; quite as surprising
was the further statement that every follower of
Christ must likewise take up his cross daily, and the cross
was not merely a symbol of suffering and shame; it was
the instrument of death. Every Christian, therefore, must
die daily to self and yield himself wholly to the service of
Christ. Such self-denial and sacrifice and obedience will
result in the only experience worthy of the name <q>life;</q>
to refuse is to forfeit <q>life;</q> and the loss will be eternal
for those who are ashamed to follow the Master now will
be rejected by him when he returns <q>in his own glory,
and the glory of the Father, and of the holy angels.</q> Of
this future glory of the coming Christ, three of the disciples
were to catch a foregleam only eight days later on
the Mount of Transfiguration, and Jesus therefore adds,
<q>There are some of them that stand here, who shall in
no wise taste of death, till they see the kingdom of God.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>4. The Transfiguration. Ch. 9:28-36</head>

<quote rend="display">
28 And it came to pass about eight days after these sayings,
that he took with him Peter and John and James, and went
up into the mountain to pray. 29 And as he was praying, the
fashion of his countenance was altered, and his raiment <hi rend='italic'>became</hi>
white <hi rend='italic'>and</hi> dazzling. 30 And behold, there talked with
him two men, who were Moses and Elijah; 31 who appeared
in glory, and spake of his decease which he was about to accomplish
at Jerusalem. 32 Now Peter and they that were
with him were heavy with sleep: but when they were fully
awake, they saw his glory, and the two men that stood with
him. 33 And it came to pass, as they were parting from him,
Peter said unto Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here:
and let us make three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
Moses, and one for Elijah: not knowing what he said. 34
And while he said these things, there came a cloud, and overshadowed
them: and they feared as they entered into the
cloud. 35 And a voice came out of the cloud, saying, This is
my Son, my chosen: hear ye him. 36 And when the voice
came, Jesus was found alone. And they held their peace,
and told no man in those days any of the things which they
had seen.
</quote>

<p>
The transfiguration of Christ was closely associated
with the predictions both of his death and of his return
in glory. It prepared him and also his disciples for the
former and it was a symbol and a foretaste of the latter.
Just what the physical experience may have been, it is
difficult to conjecture. It was not like that of Moses on
Mount Sinai when his face glowed with reflected light. In
the case of Jesus the glory was from within. A divine
splendor shone forth irradiating the body and even the
garments of our Lord.
</p>

<p>
Luke tells us that this occurred as Jesus was praying;
and it is more than a mere figure of speech to say that
when in prayer his followers find, in some measure, what
it is to be transfigured into his likeness from one degree
of glory to another by the power of his indwelling Spirit.
</p>

<p>
Jesus had been accompanied on the mountain top by
only Peter, James, and John; but suddenly <q>There talked
with him two men, who were Moses and Elijah; who
appeared in glory, and spake of his decease which he was
about to accomplish at Jerusalem.</q> This, then, was the
high purpose of the event; it was to interpret to the mind
of Christ more perfectly the meaning of his death, and to
encourage him to endure its anguish by this glimpse of
the glory that would follow. It is easy to understand why
Moses and Elijah should be selected for so august a conference.
One had been regarded as the symbol of law and
the other of prophecy, and both law and prophecy pointed
forward to Calvary; and again both Moses and Elijah had
received a special revelation of the grace of God, and he
was to manifest his grace supremely in the death of his
Son.
</p>

<p>
It is not strange that Peter longed to linger in such
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
heavenly companionship, and in bewilderment absurdly
proposed the erection on the mountain of three booths for
the comfort of Jesus, Moses, and Elijah. <q>While he said
these things, there came a cloud, and overshadowed
them: ... and a voice came out of the cloud, saying,
This is my Son, my chosen: hear ye him.</q> There was no
need of detaining Moses and Elijah; if the Master remained
with his disciples, that was enough. Henceforth
all that the Law and the Prophets had foreshadowed
would be completely revealed and embodied in Jesus
Christ. Part of that revelation was made in his death;
the full revelation will come when he returns in that glory
of which the Mount of Transfiguration gave a foregleam.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>5. The Demoniac Boy. Ch. 9:37-45</head>

<quote rend="display">
37 And it came to pass, on the next day, when they were
come down from the mountain, a great multitude met him.
38 And behold, a man from the multitude cried, saying,
Teacher, I beseech thee to look upon my son; for he is mine
only child: 39 and behold, a spirit taketh him, and he suddenly
crieth out; and it teareth him that he foameth, and it
hardly departeth from him, bruising him sorely. 40 And I
besought thy disciples to cast it out; and they could not. 41
And Jesus answered and said, O faithless and perverse generation,
how long shall I be with you, and bear with you?
bring hither thy son. 42 And as he was yet a coming, the
demon dashed him down, and tare <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> grievously. But
Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and healed the boy, and
gave him back to his father. 43 And they were all astonished
at the majesty of God.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
But while all were marvelling at all the things which he
did, he said unto his disciples, 44 Let these words sink into
your ears: for the Son of man shall be delivered up into the
hands of men. 45 But they understood not this saying, and
it was concealed from them, that they should not perceive it;
and they were afraid to ask him about this saying.
</quote>

<p>
It is not strange that artists love to paint the contrast
between the picture of Jesus on the mountain encompassed
by glory and of the demoniac boy surrounded by the
multitudes on the plain; yet it requires no canvas or artificial
color to heighten the contrast presented by the historian
in his simple story. Jesus long before had learned
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
what it was to exchange the glories of heaven for the
shadows and sufferings of earth and the compassion which
drew him from the skies was never withheld, even at times
when he naturally might have been absorbed in thoughts
concerning his coming suffering and redeeming work. He
was instantly moved with tender pity as he heard the agonizing
words of the father and saw the distress of the son.
However, he was even more moved by the unbelief and
sin and anguish and godlessness of the world which he had
come to save, and of which this scene was but a symbol and
a picture. <q>O faithless and perverse generation,</q> he
cried, <q>how long shall I be with you, and bear with you?</q>
Can it not be said reverently that the contrasted experiences
of the mountain and the plain made Jesus for the
moment homesick for heaven? Yet Jesus neither hesitated
nor delayed in the path of duty or in the presence of
human need. He <q>rebuked the unclean spirit, and healed
the boy, and gave him back to his father.</q>
</p>

<p>
While all were wondering and astonished at his divine
power and marvelous works, he turned to his disciples to
impress upon them the dark secret which was resting on his
soul. He told them that the time was near when he
was to be given up to suffer and to die; <q>But they understood
not this saying.</q> Here was a Man whose sympathy
was tender toward all; but who sympathized with him?
How often some one of his followers has borne a burden of
hidden sorrow, even in the company of friends and when
surrounded by admiring throngs!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>6. Jesus Rebuking Pride and Bigotry. Ch. 9:46-50</head>

<quote rend="display">
46 And there arose a reasoning among them, which of
them was the greatest. 47 But when Jesus saw the reasoning
of their heart, he took a little child, and set him by his
side, 48 and said unto them, Whosoever shall receive this
little child in my name receiveth me: and whosoever shall
receive me receiveth him that sent me: for he that is least
among you all, the same is great.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
49 And John answered and said, Master, we saw one
casting out demons in thy name; and we forbade him, because
he followeth not with us. 50 But Jesus said unto him,
Forbid <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> not: for he that is not against you is for you.
</quote>

<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg0101'/>

<p>
This was no new dispute in which the followers of Jesus
were engaged. The question was as to which of them
should be the greatest in his Kingdom. There was something
admirable in the discussion, for it revealed their
faith. To them the Master was yet to be King of kings
and Lord of lords, and they desired to have places nearest
to his throne. Our conception of his Kingdom may be
more correct, but if its glories were as real to us as they
were to them, if we had faith enough to see this Kingdom
in its real importance, we, too, might at times question
what our relative places in this Kingdom are or will be.
</p>

<p>
However, Jesus rebuked them, for there is no place for
pride among the followers of Christ. Our nearness to him
is not won by selfish effort or granted by arbitrary decree;
it is conditioned upon the humble service we may render
in his name. <q>He took a little child, and set him by his
side;</q> not because a child is a picture of humility&mdash;most
children are self-conscious and absurdly proud&mdash;but because
the care of a child is a symbol of humble service, and
it was this spirit which Jesus praised. To care for a child,
or for men and women who like children are in need of our
help and sympathy and support, if done for the sake of
Christ and in the name of Christ, is a service rendered to
the Master himself and not only to him but also to his
Father. The willingness to undertake such humble service
is the measure of true greatness.
</p>

<p>
The mention of service in the mind of the Master reminded
John of a recent incident which he felt to be quite
to his credit; so <q>John answered and said, Master, we saw
one casting out demons in thy name; and we forbade him,
because he followeth not with us.</q> There was something
admirable in the spirit and action of John. He was so devoted
to Christ that he wished everyone professing his
name to join the company of disciples, to live and to labor
and to suffer with them. There is always something admirable
in loyalty to a denomination or a sect. If one has
found what he believes to be the highest form of Christian
life and service, if one feels that he is treading the surest
and shortest road to heaven, it is certainly commendable
in him to wish others to share his peculiar blessedness.
</p>

<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>

<p>
Jesus, however, rebuked him, and said, <q>Forbid him
not: for he that is not against you is for you.</q> After all,
there is no place for bigotry among the followers of Christ.
We may love and admire our sect or society, but we are
never to stop the work of a fellow Christian however much
he may differ from us. There are only two questions to
ask: First, Is he casting out demons? That is to say, is he
really accomplishing good? Second, Is he doing the work
in the name of a divine, crucified, risen Christ? If so,
<q>Forbid him not.</q> We must not expect all Christians to
repeat the same creed or to enjoy the same ritual or to accept
the same polity or to employ the same methods of
work. We should remember the word of the Master, <q>He
that is not against you is for you.</q>
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>V. The Journeys Toward Jerusalem. Chs. 9:51 to 19:28</head>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>A. The First Stages. Ch. 9:51 to 13:21</head>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>1. The Inhospitable Samaritans. Ch. 9:51-56</head>

<quote rend="display">
51 And it came to pass, when the days were well-nigh
come that he should be received up, he stedfastly set his
face to go to Jerusalem, 52 and sent messengers before his
face: and they went, and entered into a village of the Samaritans,
to make ready for him. 53 And they did not receive
him, because his face was <hi rend='italic'>as though he were</hi> going to Jerusalem.
54 And when his disciples James and John saw <hi rend='italic'>this</hi>,
they said, Lord, wilt thou that we bid fire to come down
from heaven, and consume them? 55 But he turned, and rebuked
them. 56 And they went to another village.
</quote>

<p>
The record of the last journeys of our Lord toward Jerusalem
forms a unique feature in the Gospel of Luke. In
the other Gospels some of these incidents are included but
they occupy only one or two chapters; here, however, they
fill ten chapters with events most of which are no where
else related.
</p>

<p>
The direction of the journeying was first eastward
through the borders of Galilee and Samaria, then across
the Jordan and then southward through the region of
Perea. This region is not so designated in the Bible but
is described by the phrase, <q>beyond the Jordan,</q> and as
most of these incidents occurred there, this period of the
life of Jesus is commonly called his <q>Perean ministry.</q>
Luke here emphasizes the divine prevision and at the same
time the human courage of our Lord. He indicates that
Jesus saw plainly his coming death and also his glorious
ascension, but that he unfalteringly moved forward to the
intervening agonies of the cross.
</p>

<p>
The first incident of these journeys was in a village of the
Samaritans. Certain messengers had gone before to prepare
entertainment for the large company which followed
Jesus, but the Samaritans would not receive him; then his
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
disciples, James and John, suggested that they should
<q>bid fire to come down from heaven and consume them.</q>
There was something admirable in the indignation of these
disciples. The Samaritans were moved by a narrow and
provincial prejudice and they were offering to Jesus a
gratuitous insult. It sometimes seems that the genius for
indignation has disappeared, and it is refreshing to see men
who feel deeply any disrespect to Christ, any injury to his
cause.
</p>

<p>
But Jesus rebuked his disciples, <q>And they went to
another village.</q> There may be place for righteous indignation,
but there is no place among the followers of
Christ for anger, for intolerance, or for revenge. This is
not a time of judgment, but of grace. It is not for us to
attempt to administer vengeance, but to preach the gospel
of love.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>2. Jesus Rebuking Rashness, Insincerity, and Indecision. Ch. 9:57-62</head>

<quote rend="display">
57 And as they went on the way, a certain man said unto
him, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest. 58 And
Jesus said unto him, The foxes have holes, and the birds of
the heaven <hi rend='italic'>have</hi> nests; but the Son of man hath not where
to lay his head. 59 And he said unto another, Follow me.
But he said, Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father.
60 But he said unto him, Leave the dead to bury their own
dead; but go thou and publish abroad the kingdom of God.
61 And another also said, I will follow thee, Lord; but first
suffer me to bid farewell to them that are at my house. 62
But Jesus said unto him, No man, having put his hand to
the plow, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God.
</quote>

<p>
These three incidents show how carefully Jesus was
sifting those who wished to become his followers and how
deeply he appreciated the fact that he was passing through
this region for the last time. The first of the three men
with whom Jesus spoke was being swept along by his emotions,
by the sight of the crowd which was following the
Master, and by the thought that it would be a great privilege
to be in such company. He had not for a moment
realized that it might involve sacrifice and pain to become
a disciple of the Master. It was for this reason that Jesus
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
turned to him with a statement which implies a rebuke and
suggests that the Master realized the thoughtlessness and
rashness which were prompting this professed follower.
<q>The foxes have holes, and the birds of the heaven have
nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head.</q>
Of course Jesus is eager to have men vow their allegiance
to him and openly acknowledge their discipleship; but
among his followers there is no place for rashness. He
would have us count the cost.
</p>

<p>
In the case of the next man, when he was bidden to follow
Christ, he offered an excuse, <q>Lord, suffer me first to
go and bury my father.</q> This was a natural request and
it seemed that a tender duty made it necessary for him to
decline the invitation of the Master. There seems something
rather severe in the reply, <q>Leave the dead to bury
their own dead; but go thou and publish abroad the kingdom
of God.</q> It is evident that Jesus had looked into the
heart of this man and saw that he was making a selfish excuse
out of a sacred duty. If his reply was sincere, it none
the less merited a reproof, for a more sacred duty than
caring for the dead was laid upon him by the invitation of
the living Christ. No tie, however tender, can be regarded
as a sufficient excuse for refusing to become a follower of
Christ. Jesus was passing that way for the last time.
Prompt obedience was absolutely necessary. Those who
were spiritually <q>dead</q> and who had not heard the summons
of the Master could provide the needed burial; but
it was possible for the one who had been called by Christ
to perform a more sacred task: he could begin to proclaim
the gospel of salvation and of life.
</p>

<p>
In the case of the third possible disciple, there was no
carelessness; he had counted the cost; it was not his intention
to make any excuse; he was sincere and definite in his
intention, but he wished to delay. He was not quite certain
that it was best just then to leave his family and his
friends. At least he wished to delay long enough to return
to his home and to bid them farewell. But Jesus rebuked
him; <q>No man, having put his hand to the plow, and
looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God.</q> Such hesitation
indicates that one has not appreciated the glory and
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
privilege involved in the call of Christ or that he still weighs
against it the sacrifices it involves. He is self-condemned.
There is no place for indecision among those who are to be
heirs of the Kingdom of God.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>3. The Mission of the Seventy. Ch. 10:1-24</head>

<quote rend="display">
1 Now after these things the Lord appointed seventy
others, and sent them two and two before his face into every
city and place, whither he himself was about to come. 2 And
he said unto them, The harvest indeed is plenteous, but the
laborers are few: pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest,
that he send forth laborers into his harvest. 3 Go your ways;
behold, I send you forth as lambs in the midst of wolves.
4 Carry no purse, no wallet, no shoes; and salute no man on
the way. 5 And into whatsoever house ye shall enter, first
say, Peace <hi rend='italic'>be</hi> to this house. 6 And if a son of peace be there,
your peace shall rest upon him: but if not, it shall turn to you
again. 7 And in that same house remain, eating and drinking
such things as they give: for the laborer is worthy of his hire.
Go not from house to house. 8 And into whatsoever city ye
enter, and they receive you, eat such things as are set before
you: 9 and heal the sick that are therein, and say unto them,
The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. 10 But into
whatsoever city ye shall enter, and they receive you not, go
out into the streets thereof and say, 11 Even the dust from
your city, that cleaveth to our feet, we wipe off against you:
nevertheless know this, that the kingdom of God is come nigh.
12 I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable in that day for
Sodom, than for that city. 13 Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe
unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the mighty works had been done
in Tyre and Sidon, which were done in you, they would have
repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes. 14 But it
shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the judgment,
than for you. 15 And thou, Capernaum, shalt thou be exalted
unto heaven? thou shalt be brought down unto Hades. 16
He that heareth you heareth me; and he that rejecteth you
rejecteth me; and he that rejecteth me rejecteth him that
sent me.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
17 And the seventy returned with joy, saying, Lord, even
the demons are subject unto us in thy name. 18 And he said
unto them, I beheld Satan fallen as lightning from heaven.
19 Behold, I have given you authority to tread upon serpents
and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy: and nothing
shall in any wise hurt you. 20 Nevertheless in this rejoice
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rejoice
that your names are written in heaven.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
21 In that same hour he rejoiced in the Holy Spirit, and
said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that
thou didst hide these things from the wise and understanding,
and didst reveal them unto babes: yea, Father; for so it
was well-pleasing in thy sight. 22 All things have been delivered
unto me of my Father: and no one knoweth who the
Son is, save the Father; and who the Father is, save the Son,
and he to whomsoever the Son willeth to reveal <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>. 23
And turning to the disciples, he said privately, Blessed <hi rend='italic'>are</hi>
the eyes which see the things that ye see: 24 for I say unto
you, that many prophets and kings desired to see the things
which ye see, and saw them not; and to hear the things which
ye hear, and heard them not.
</quote>

<p>
The sending out of the seventy messengers who were to
prepare the way for the ministry of Jesus is recorded by
Luke alone. This is in harmony with the fact that only
in this Gospel do we read of the extended journeys toward
Jerusalem made by our Lord on the occasion of which the
Seventy were sent forth. The work was for only a limited
time and their office was temporary; but in his instructions
to them Jesus suggested many principles of life which apply
to his followers in all the ages. He first intimated the reason
for their being chosen. It was because the harvest
field in which they were to work was so great and the laborers
so few. He intimated that before the world can
receive the message which the Seventy were sent to deliver,
they and their successors must earnestly pray the Lord of
the harvest to send forth more laborers into the field. This
is a prayer which all who serve the Master may offer earnestly
and at all times. The work seems to be only begun.
Our sympathy with the Master will make us yearn to see
the work accomplished with more speed, which can only
be possible when larger numbers of laborers are secured.
V. 2.
</p>

<p>
Jesus told his messengers that as they went forth they
must expect to meet with dangers. <q>I send you forth as
lambs in the midst of wolves.</q> They were, however, to
encumber themselves with nothing superfluous and they
were to waste no time in idle ceremonies; they must journey
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
as men who are impelled by one supreme motive. Vs. 3, 4.
</p>

<p>
As they entered a home they were to offer the peace
which the gospel can give, but if rejected, they were to believe
that their very message would return to them with
added force. Thus our Lord signified that no word spoken
for his sake is really wasted. Vs. 5, 6.
</p>

<p>
They were to continue in the home which received them,
content with what was given, offering relief to those in distress
and using every opportunity to proclaim the message
of grace. Vs. 7-9.
</p>

<p>
Where their message was refused, and they were not received
by city or town, they were to turn away, shaking off
the dust of their feet, thus intimating by an Oriental symbol
that they had no connection with the enemies of Christ.
At no time is the reception of the gospel message universal.
There are always some who refuse to accept its gracious
offer. Vs. 10-12.
</p>

<p>
The thought of those who would surely reject his messengers
reminded Jesus of the cities which had already rejected
him, and he paused for a moment to speak solemnly
of their guilty unbelief. He referred to Chorazin and
Bethsaida, declaring that in the Day of Judgment it would
be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon than for these cities,
for even the heathen world would have repented in the face
of such evidence of his divine mission as Jesus had given to
the cities of Israel. He referred particularly to Capernaum,
to its peculiar privileges and to its consequently greater
condemnation. Jesus was stating the abiding principle
that unusual opportunities involve unusual responsibilities.
He emphasized the seriousness of rejecting his messengers
by stating that in despising them men are really despising
himself and that those who reject Jesus are rejecting his
Father who sent him., vs. 13-16.
</p>

<p>
In order to complete the story of the Seventy, Luke proceeds
at once to describe their return. They came back
elated, with the report that even the demons were subject
to them. Our Lord replied by a statement that in the
overthrow of these messengers of Satan he saw the ultimate
defeat of the Prince of darkness and of all the forces of evil,
and he declared that he was giving to his messengers power
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
over all that might oppose or might threaten to destroy
them. Yet, he added, their chief joy should not be in their
ability to perform these works of wonder, but rather in their
having a part in his triumphant cause and in receiving his
salvation. Vs. 17-20.
</p>

<p>
At this time our Lord himself shared in the exultation of
his followers and returned thanks to the Father for what he
was accomplishing through the humble messengers whom
Jesus had chosen, so that the results were a manifestation
of divine power. He added a striking claim which indicates
that the ideal Man is likewise the true Son of God who
alone can reveal the Father to men. Then lastly, as he
turned to his disciples, he congratulated them upon their
great privilege, assuring them that <q>many prophets and
kings</q> desired to see the things which they were seeing as
his servants and as the instruments of his power. He intimated
something of the exalted joy which through all the
coming years his followers would feel as they realized their
privilege of serving such a Master, and of revealing him to
men. Vs. 21-24.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>4. The Good Samaritan. Ch. 10:25-37</head>

<quote rend="display">
25 And behold, a certain lawyer stood up and made trial
of him, saying, Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal
life? 26 And he said unto him, What is written in the law?
how readest thou? 27 And he answering said, Thou shalt
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy
neighbor as thyself. 28 And he said unto him, Thou hast
answered right: this do, and thou shalt live. 29 But he, desiring
to justify himself, said unto Jesus, And who is my
neighbor? 30 Jesus made answer and said, A certain man
was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho; and he fell
among robbers, who both stripped him and beat him, and
departed, leaving him half dead. 31 And by chance a certain
priest was going down that way: and when he saw him, he
passed by on the other side. 32 And in like manner a Levite
also, when he came to the place, and saw him, passed by on
other side. 33 But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed,
came where he was: and when he saw him, he was moved
with compassion, 34 and came to him, and bound up his
wounds, pouring on <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> oil and wine; and he set him on
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
his own beast, and brought him to an inn, and took care of
him. 35 And on the morrow he took out two shillings, and
gave them to the host, and said, Take care of him; and whatsoever
thou spendest more, I, when I come back again, will
repay thee. 36 Which of these three, thinkest thou, proved
neighbor unto him that fell among the robbers? 37 And he
said, He that showed mercy on him. And Jesus said unto
him, Go, and do thou likewise.
</quote>

<p>
The parable of the Good Samaritan was spoken to a certain
lawyer who, trusting to his knowledge of the Old Testament,
and of its subtle interpretations by the rabbis, came
to Jesus hoping to dispute with him and to defeat him in
debate. He asked Jesus this question, <q>Teacher, what
shall I do to inherit eternal life?</q> He evidently thought
that Jesus would prescribe some new rites or ceremonies or
would in some other way disparage the Law. He was startled,
then, to have Jesus reply, <q>What is written in the
law?</q> This answer robbed the enemy of his own weapon.
He, however, made a skillful reply, and declared that the
Law is summarized in the requirement to love God and
man. Jesus again replied, <q>Thou hast answered right:
this do, and thou shalt live.</q> There was no shadow of
evasion or deception in the statement of Jesus. Perfect
love to God and to man is surely the way of life; but who
can show such perfect love? Jesus came not to destroy
this requirement of the Law but to reveal its complete fulfillment,
to secure pardon for those who were guilty of its
infraction, and to give power to those who felt their need.
</p>

<p>
The reply of Jesus not only defeated the lawyer; it smote
his conscience. He realized that he himself had never fulfilled
the requirement of the Law he knew so well. He
therefore attempted to justify himself by limiting the
sphere to which the law of love applies. This is always the
experience of those who seek to save themselves while rejecting
the salvation of Christ. No one in his own power
can fulfill the demands of this perfect law; either we must
secure aid outside ourselves and trust in a loving Saviour,
or else we must in some way lessen the demands which the
law makes. The lawyer suggested that it is impossible to
love everyone, even though it be required to love our neighbors,
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
and to justify himself he asked the question, <q>And
who is my neighbor?</q> Jesus replied by the story of the
man, evidently a Jew, who went down the steep road from
Jerusalem to Jericho and, as he passed through the narrow
gorge, was beset by robbers who stripped him of his garments
and his possessions and left him half dead. The
first to approach this pitiful sufferer was a priest, a man
whose profession and task in life would induce him to perform
a deed of mercy, but in fear of thieves or in blind oblivion
to the need of the wounded man, he passed by on the
other side. Next came a Levite, one whose office was that
of a helper to the priests, a man who supposedly would be
less burdened by official duties and would have more time
to extend relief; but he likewise passed by. At last came a
Samaritan, a man of an alien race and of a despised religion,
but he showed compassion; he bound up the wounds of the
sufferer and placed him on his beast and brought him to an
inn and paid for his entertainment. He showed the spirit
of love. Thus Jesus indicated that our neighbor is not
only one who <q>lives near</q> but one who needs our help, as
well as one who helps our need. He demonstrated the
truth that the law of love is not limited by rank or station
or race or creed. Nor is it limited to man. One must likewise
love God with all the heart, and thus he will surely
love and serve the Son in whom the love of God is made
perfect.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>5. Martha and Mary. Ch. 10:38-42</head>

<quote rend="display">
38 Now as they went on their way, he entered into a certain
village: and a certain woman named Martha received
him into her house. 39 And she had a sister called Mary,
who also sat at the Lord's feet, and heard his word. 40 But
Martha was cumbered about much serving; and she came up
to him, and said, Lord, dost thou not care that my sister did
leave me to serve alone? bid her therefore that she help me.
41 But the Lord answered and said unto her, Martha, Martha,
thou art anxious and troubled about many things: 42 but one
thing is needful: for Mary hath chosen the good part, which
shall not be taken away from her.
</quote>

<p>
The unfailing human interest of Luke is nowhere more
perfectly expressed than by this exquisite scene in the home
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
at Bethany. It is to be regretted that it has become the
occasion for endless debate as to the relative merits of
Martha and Mary. Some imagine that the former was
unloving but energetic and efficient, and that the latter
was affectionate, but sentimental and indolent. In reality
both sisters had admirable qualities; both loved the Master
and longed to please him; but on this occasion Martha, in
her very eagerness to serve, had overburdened herself in the
preparation of an elaborate meal, while Mary, with truer
intuition of what Jesus wished, <q>sat at the Lord's feet, and
heard his word.</q> She knew that he desired, not for his
own sake, but for theirs, to reveal himself and to deliver his
heavenly message, and thus according to the fine art of hospitality,
she considered first the wish of her guest and was
thus doing more to entertain the Master than was her sister.
</p>

<p>
<q>Martha was cumbered about much serving;</q> she was
distracted by the many things she was trying to do. It is
possible for a follower of Christ to attempt too much; sometimes
this is due to a sense of self-importance and of pride.
It may result in such a mood of irritation and temper as
was shown by Martha when in criticizing her sisters he humiliated
her by rebuking her in the presence of their Guest,
and by addressing the remark to him rebuked him as well,
<q>Lord, dost thou not care that my sister did leave me to
serve alone? bid her therefore that she help me.</q> In his
reply Jesus showed his affection by tenderly repeating her
name, but he rebuked her spirit and revealed its cause,
<q>Martha, Martha, thou art anxious and troubled about
many things: but one thing is needful: for Mary hath chosen
the good part, which shall not be taken away from her.</q>
There was no need for an elaborate meal; but few things or
one would have sufficed; yet one thing was needful, and
that Mary had chosen, for while the Master does appreciate
all that we undertake for him, he knows that our first need
is to sit at his feet and learn his will; then in our tasks we
shall be calm and peaceful and kindly, and at last our service
may attain the perfectness of that of Mary when in a
later scene she poured upon the feet of Jesus the ointment,
the perfume of which still fills the world.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>6. Jesus' Teaching Concerning Prayer. Ch. 11:1-13</head>

<quote rend="display">
1 And it came to pass, as he was praying in a certain
place, that when he ceased, one of his disciples said unto
him, Lord, teach us to pray, even as John also taught his
disciples. 2 And he said unto them, When ye pray, say,
Father, Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. 3 Give
us day by day our daily bread. 4 And forgive us our sins;
for we ourselves also forgive every one that is indebted to us.
And bring us not into temptation.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
5 And he said unto them, Which of you shall have a friend,
and shall go unto him at midnight, and say to him, Friend,
lend me three loaves; 6 for a friend of mine is come to me
from a journey, and I have nothing to set before him; 7 and
he from within shall answer and say, Trouble me not: the
door is now shut, and my children are with me in bed; I
cannot rise and give thee? 8 I say unto you, Though he will
not rise and give him, because he is his friend, yet because
of his importunity he will arise and give him as many as he
needeth. 9 And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given
you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened
unto you. 10 For every one that asketh receiveth; and he
that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be
opened. 11 And of which of you that is a father shall his son
ask a loaf, and he give him a stone? or a fish, and he for a
fish give him a serpent? 12 Or <hi rend='italic'>if</hi> he shall ask an egg, will
he give him a scorpion? 13 If ye then, being evil, know how
to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall
<hi rend='italic'>your</hi> heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask
him?
</quote>

<p>
When the disciples came to the Master with the request,
<q>Lord, teach us to pray,</q> they had already, for some time,
been with Christ in the school of prayer, and they had been
impressed by that most valuable of object lessons, namely,
the example of Christ himself. If in our minds doubt ever
arises as to the reality and efficacy of prayer, we need only
turn to the Gospel of Luke to be reminded that our Lord
spent long hours in intercession and that he prayed at every
crisis in his life. Surely we shall not be misled if we follow
in his steps!
</p>

<p>
What the disciples wished, however, was some special
form or formula for prayer, such as John the Baptist seems
to have given his followers. Jesus replied by granting
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
them a matchless model and then by encouraging them in
the assurance that prayer will surely be heard. This
<q>Lord's Prayer,</q> more fully recorded by Matthew, was not
intended as a form which must be used rigidly on all occasions,
but as a type which should mold all prayer, however
free and varied and spontaneous it may be.
</p>

<p>
The first word, <q>Father,</q> suggests the filial spirit in
which all believers should draw near to God, and it intimates
much of the encouragement which Jesus gave his
disciples in the verses which immediately follow this prayer.
</p>

<p>
The prayer contains five petitions, two relating to the
cause of God in the world, and three to personal needs of
the petitioners. The first is a request that the <q>name</q> of
God, his revelation, or our conception of God, be so reverenced,
or so exalted, on earth as it is in heaven. The second
is a parallel request, namely, that his Kingdom may come.
This Kingdom is to be external, visible, glorious; it depends
upon the inward transformation of individuals, but it will
yet appear in a perfected social order, and in the universal
reign of Christ. The next petition is for <q>bread sufficient
for our needs,</q> and it implies our right to pray for all that
concerns our physical welfare. We are then taught to pray
for pardon, as we come to God in a spirit of forgiveness toward
others; and lastly, to ask for continual protection
from the snares of the Adversary and from all the powers of
evil.
</p>

<p>
To encourage his disciples in such petitions Jesus gave
them the story of the man whose ceaseless, almost shameless,
asking secured for him the answer to his request for
needed bread. Jesus implied, however, that there is, on
the part of God, no such reluctance to be overcome, so that
all who <q>ask</q> of him will receive what they need; if they
<q>seek</q> relief he will grant it, if they <q>knock,</q> even at <q>midnight,</q>
he will open the door without delay.
</p>

<p>
Further still Jesus encouraged prayer by again reminding
his hearers that they were praying to a Father. Human
parents reply to the requests of their children, not by mocking
them or with injurious gifts, not by giving a stone when
bread is asked, or a serpent for a fish, or a scorpion instead
of an egg. If then, with all our imperfections and limitations,
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
we know how to give good gifts to our children, much
more can we expect our heavenly Father to give his Holy
Spirit, and so all other good if lesser gifts, to them that ask
him. Thus again we see that the blessed name of <q>Father</q>
is the key to the lesson. If we approach him as children it
will be with confidence, but also with submission, as we
know that, whether he gives or withholds, his reply will be
an expression of infinite mercy and of fatherly love.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>7. Jesus Rebuking Blasphemy and Unbelief. Ch. 11:14-36</head>

<quote rend="display">
14 And he was casting out a demon <hi rend='italic'>that was</hi> dumb. And
it came to pass, when the demon was gone out, the dumb
man spake; and the multitudes marvelled. 15 But some of
them said, By Beelzebub the prince of the demons casteth he
out demons. 16 And others, trying <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, sought of him a sign
from heaven. 17 But he, knowing their thoughts, said unto
them, Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to
desolation; and a house <hi rend='italic'>divided</hi> against a house falleth. 18
And if Satan also is divided against himself, how shall his
kingdom stand? because ye say that I cast out demons by
Beelzebub. 19 And if I by Beelzebub cast out demons, by
whom do your sons cast them out? therefore shall they be
your judges. 20 But if I by the finger of God cast out demons,
then is the kingdom of God come upon you. 21 When the
strong <hi rend='italic'>man</hi> fully armed guardeth his own court, his goods
are in peace: 22 but when a stronger than he shall come
upon him, and overcome him, he taketh from him his whole
armor wherein he trusted, and divideth his spoils. 23 He
that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not
with me scattereth. 24 The unclean spirit when he is gone
out of the man, passeth through waterless places, seeking
rest; and finding none, he saith, I will turn back unto my
house whence I came out. 25 And when he is come, he findeth
it swept and garnished. 26 Then goeth he, and taketh
<hi rend='italic'>to him</hi> seven other spirits more evil than himself; and they
enter in and dwell there: and the last state of that man becometh
worse than the first.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
27 And it came to pass, as he said these things, a certain
woman out of the multitude lifted up her voice, and said unto
him, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the breasts
which thou didst suck. 28 But he said, Yea rather, blessed
are they that hear the word of God, and keep it.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
29 And when the multitudes were gathering together unto
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
him, he began to say, This generation is an evil generation:
it seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be given to it
but the sign of Jonah. 30 For even as Jonah became a sign
unto the Ninevites, so shall also the Son of man be to this
generation. 31 The queen of the south shall rise up in the
judgment with the men of this generation, and shall condemn
them: for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the
wisdom of Solomon; and behold, a greater than Solomon is
here. 32 The men of Nineveh shall stand up in the judgment
with this generation, and shall condemn it: for they repented
at the preaching of Jonah; and behold, a greater than Jonah
is here.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
33 No man, when he hath lighted a lamp, putteth it in a
cellar, neither under the bushel, but on the stand, that they
which enter in may see the light. 34 The lamp of thy body
is thine eye: when thine eye is single, thy whole body also is
full of light; but when it is evil, thy body also is full of darkness.
35 Look therefore whether the light that is in thee be
not darkness. 36 If therefore thy whole body be full of light,
having no part dark, it shall be wholly full of light, as when
the lamp with its bright shining doth give thee light.
</quote>

<p>
The first of these two discourses, vs. 14-26, was given by
Jesus in reply to the charge that he wrought his miracles by
Satanic power, v. 15; the second, vs. 29-36, was an answer
to the demand that he should compel his enemies to believe
in him by giving them <q>a sign from heaven,</q> v. 16.
</p>

<p>
Jesus had just cast out a demon. His enemies did not
attempt to deny that a miracle had been performed; but, in
order to discredit him with the people, they explained the
miracle on the ground that Jesus must be in league with the
Devil. He replied by showing the absurdity of suggesting
that the Devil was casting out devils, or <q>demons,</q> for in
that case his power would be like a kingdom <q>divided
against itself</q> and so certain to be <q>brought to desolation,</q>
or like a house thus divided and sure to fall. Vs. 17, 18.
He then turned the charge against themselves: some of
their countrymen claimed the power to cast out demons;
Jesus did not discuss the reality of these reputed cures but
pointedly asked by what power they were effected; is it also
demonic power? v. 19. Jesus then declared definitely that
his miracles were being wrought by divine power and that
their character was a certain proof that he was representing
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
not the kingdom of the Devil but <q>the kingdom of God.</q>
V. 20. Instead of aiding the Devil, he was despoiling him.
He described the Devil as though a strong man, fully armed
and guarding his goods, but Jesus himself was a <q>stronger
than he,</q> and was taking away his armor and delivering
his captives by miracles of grace. Vs. 21, 22. In this conflict
there can be no neutrality; one must be on the side
either of the Devil or of Christ. V. 23.
</p>

<p>
Jesus then rebuked his enemies by the parable of the
Unclean Spirit. The demon of unbelief had once possessed
the Jews, and had been manifested in the form of idolatry;
it had been cast out, but it had returned with more terrible
manifestations of hypocrisy, covetousness, hatred, fanaticism,
and pride. Such had been the fate of the nation; and
such is the experience of an individual who turns from sin
and rebels against Satan but fails to accept the Lordship of
Christ. The empty heart is in peril. Reformation is not
regeneration. One must beware of the demon of unbelief.
Vs. 24-26.
</p>

<p>
At this juncture a <q>woman out of the multitude</q> interrupted
with an expression of congratulation for the mother
of Jesus. In reply Jesus intimated that his mother might
rightly be called <q>blessed,</q> but that the woman had
missed the real point; it was a privilege to sustain to Christ
such a close human and natural relationship, but better far
to possess that spiritual kinship which is indicated by faith
and by obedience to God. Vs. 27, 28.
</p>

<p>
Jesus continued to rebuke the unbelief of the Jews as he
now turned to answer directly the demand for <q>a sign from
heaven.</q> He declared that such a sign would be given,
in his resurrection from the dead. This miracle would be
wrought without any human intervention; it would be a
direct act of God and would fulfill the conditions of <q>a sign
from heaven;</q> it would be the counterpart of the miraculous
deliverance of Jonah from the sea. However, the very
demand for such a sign was an impertinence and an insult;
it reflected discredit upon the divine character of the miracles
which Jesus had already wrought. It failed to recognize
the nature of his teachings, which surpassed the wisdom
of Solomon and the startling message of Jonah. The
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
eagerness of the heathen queen to hear, the willingness of
the Ninevites to repent, rebuked the stubborn unbelief of
the Jews who refused to accept <q>a greater than Solomon,</q>
<q>a greater than Jonah.</q> Vs. 29-32.
</p>

<p>
Finally Jesus showed that their guilty unbelief was not
due to lack of evidence or to the need of a new <q>sign,</q> but
to their indifference and their impenitence. As a lamp is
designed to light a house, and as the eye is intended to illumine
the body, so the soul which is right with God possesses
the faculty of spiritual sight. This sight is dimmed and
destroyed by sin. The inability of the Jews to believe was
not due to lack of <q>signs</q> and proofs, but to lack of sight.
No amount of light will help a blind man. Those who turn
to Christ in repentance and faith and love will find him to
be the Light of the world, and their whole souls will become
radiant with divine splendor. Vs. 33-36.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>8. Pharisaism Exposed and Denounced. Ch. 11:37-54</head>

<quote rend="display">
37 Now as he spake, a Pharisee asketh him to dine with
him: and he went in, and sat down to meat. 38 And when
the Pharisee saw it, he marvelled that he had not first bathed
himself before dinner. 39 And the Lord said unto him, Now
ye the Pharisees cleanse the outside of the cup and of the
platter; but your inward part is full of extortion and wickedness.
40 Ye foolish ones, did not he that made the outside
make the inside also? 41 But give for alms those things
which are within; and behold, all things are clean unto you.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
42 But woe unto you Pharisees! for ye tithe mint and rue
and every herb, and pass over justice and the love of God:
but these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other
undone. 43 Woe unto you Pharisees! for ye love the chief
seats in the synagogues, and the salutations in the marketplaces.
44 Woe unto you! for ye are as the tombs which appear
not, and the men that walk over <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> know it not.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
45 And one of the lawyers answering saith unto him,
Teacher, in saying this thou reproachest us also. 46 And he
said, Woe unto you lawyers also! for ye load men with burdens
grievous to be borne, and ye yourselves touch not the
burdens with one of your fingers. 47 Woe unto you! for ye
build the tombs of the prophets, and your fathers killed them.
48 So ye are witnesses and consent unto the works of your
fathers: for they killed them, and ye build <hi rend='italic'>their tombs</hi>. 49
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
Therefore also said the wisdom of God, I will send unto
them prophets and apostles; and <hi rend='italic'>some</hi> of them they shall kill
and persecute; 50 that the blood of all the prophets, which
was shed from the foundation of the world, may be required
of this generation; 51 from the blood of Abel unto the blood
of Zachariah, who perished between the altar and the sanctuary:
yea, I say unto you, it shall be required of this generation.
52 Woe unto you lawyers! for ye took away the key of knowledge:
ye entered not in yourselves, and them that were entering
in ye hindered.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
53 And when he was come out from thence, the scribes
and the Pharisees began to press upon <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> vehemently, and
to provoke him to speak of many things; 54 laying wait for
him, to catch something out of his mouth.
</quote>

<p>
The conflict between Jesus and his enemies here reached
its climax. He rebuked their hypocrisy, and pronounced
upon them six solemn woes. His words are full of warning
for his followers in all ages; religion ever tends to become
a matter of form and ritual; hypocrisy is often unconscious;
its practice is almost universal.
</p>

<p>
A Pharisee whose heart was foul with sinful thoughts
wondered that Jesus had sat down to eat without first
washing his hands according to the Jewish ritual. No
such ceremony was required by the Law, but only by the
traditions upon which the Pharisees laid such stress. Jesus
declared that to wash the body while the heart is impure is
as absurd as to cleanse the outside of an unclean cup or
platter. He declared that God who made the body created
the soul also, and that God is more concerned with the latter
than with the former. He insisted that while it may be
well to wash the hands, a better preparation for a meal
would consist in filling the heart with love, which might be
expressed in gifts to the poor. It was much more important
that the Pharisee should take the hatred from his
heart, than that Jesus should wash his hands. Vs. 37-41.
</p>

<p>
Hypocrisy, however, is ever concerned with external
forms while disregarding realities. Therefore Jesus pronounced
a woe upon the Pharisees for tithing the small
garden herbs while neglecting justice toward men and love
toward God, for observing some minute religious rite while
breaking all the Ten Commandments. Yet he did not
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
condemn them for caring for these trifles, but for neglecting
things essential. <q>These ought ye to have done, and not to
leave the other undone.</q> V. 42. Jesus further rebuked the
vanity and the desire for prominence and public recognition
which is at once a mark and a cloak of hypocrisy. V. 43.
He further compared the evil influence of hypocrites to the
defiling contact with a grave, which is level with the ground,
upon which one may unconsciously tread and so become
ceremonially unclean. Men are not on their guard against
those who make loud boasts of religion. V. 44.
</p>

<p>
At this juncture a lawyer interrupted Jesus with the
statement that these severe denunciations seemed to include
him and his associates. It was true that most lawyers
were Pharisees, but they were the professional teachers
of this sect, the recognized leaders of the party; and in
denouncing all Pharisees Jesus seemed to include even
these proud expounders of the Law. Jesus replied that
religious teachers who are insincere, or who allow their religion
to become a mere matter of form, are most of all to
be rebuked. He pronounced upon them three woes: the
first, for extracting from the Law minute and burdensome
requirements which they were not careful to observe themselves.
It is a grievous fault for students and scholars to
make religion a matter of weariness and distaste, instead of
a delight to the common people. Vs. 45, 46.
</p>

<p>
Secondly, Jesus rebuked their heartless cruelty and fanaticism.
Teachers of religion are ever tempted to become
bitter partisans, and even to have a share in killing the very
prophets and apostles of God. The hatred of Jesus shown
by his enemies was like that of their fathers who had killed
the divine messengers of old. The blood of these martyrs,
from the first to the last mentioned in the Hebrew Bible
was yet to be required of the nation, and those who rejected
Jesus would partake in the judgment as they were partakers
of the crime, vs. 47-51.
</p>

<p>
Lastly, the lawyers were rebuked for keeping back the
knowledge of God, by their false interpretations of Scripture
and their disregard of the real spiritual needs of the
people. Such teachers of religion are like men who hold
the key to a sacred temple; they themselves will not enter
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
and they keep back all who would. It is a solemn responsibility
to be a professed teacher of divine truth; and to be
at once a <q>lawyer</q> and a <q>hypocrite,</q> is to merit these
solemn woes which fell from the lips of Christ. So enraged
were his hearers that they threatened him with physical
violence. Hypocrites hate to be exposed. Wise men are
glad to be warned and to repent before it is too late. He
who spoke these bitter words of rebuke is ready to pardon
and to purify and to lead his followers in the paths of service
and of peace. Vs. 52-54.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>9. Faithful Testimony Encouraged. Ch. 12:1-12</head>

<quote rend="display">
1 In the mean time, when the many thousands of the multitude
were gathered together, insomuch that they trod one
upon another, he began to say unto his disciples first of all,
Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.
2 But there is nothing covered up, that shall not be revealed;
and hid, that shall not be known. 3 Wherefore whatsoever
ye have said in the darkness shall be heard in the light; and
what ye have spoken in the ear in the inner chambers shall
be proclaimed upon the housetops. 4 And I say unto you
my friends, Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and
after that have no more that they can do. 5 But I will warn
you whom ye shall fear: Fear him, who after he hath killed
hath power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto you, Fear him.
6 Are not five sparrows sold for two pence? and not one of
them is forgotten in the sight of God. 7 But the very hairs
of your head are all numbered. Fear not: ye are of more
value than many sparrows. 8 And I say unto you, Every one
who shall confess me before men, him shall the Son of man
also confess before the angels of God: but he that denieth
me in the presence of men shall be denied in the presence of
the angels of God. 10 And every one who shall speak a word
against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but unto
him that blasphemeth against the Holy Spirit it shall not be
forgiven. 11 And when they bring you before the synagogues,
and the rulers, and the authorities, be not anxious how or
what ye shall answer, or what ye shall say: 12 for the Holy
Spirit shall teach you in that very hour what ye ought to say.
</quote>

<p>
When Jesus had bitterly rebuked the public religious
teachers of his day he turned to his disciples and spoke
words of cheer which have strengthened his followers in all
days. Such encouragement was needed; the bitter hatred
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
of his enemies now threatened the life of Jesus, and made it
evident that his disciples could expect no kinder treatment
than their Lord. Then, too, Jesus had shown the special
guilt of those who professed to be guides in matters of religion;
his disciples therefore needed courage to continue
their public witness both because of the great responsibility
involved and because it would bring upon them the hatred
of men. He encouraged them, first, by the assurance that
the corrupting influence of the Pharisees would come to an
end; their hypocrisy would be mercilessly unmasked; their
power would cease; while on the other hand the witness of
the disciples would not always be confined to places of obscurity
but would be heard in all the world. Vs. 1-3. How
truly has this prophecy been fulfilled! Compare the present
influence of Hillel or Gamaliel with that of Peter or
John. No one can measure the power for good possessed
by the humblest witness for Christ.
</p>

<p>
Jesus further encouraged his disciples by assuring them
of the loving care of God. They should look to him in reverent
trust; this would give confidence and strength and
free them from the fear of man. Their enemies could harm
only the body; God controls the eternal destiny of souls,
and to him even the body is precious, and he is concerned
with the most minute details of our lives. If he notes the
fall of a sparrow, he must know the peril and need of every
one who is testifying for his Son. Vs. 4-7.
</p>

<p>
Then again for faithful witnesses there remain great
rewards, in spite of what they now may suffer from
men. As they now acknowledge Jesus Christ as Saviour
and Lord, so in the glories of heaven he will acknowledge
them as his true and loyal warriors who merit and will share
the blessedness of his triumphant reign. Vs. 8, 9. On the
other hand, those who blaspheme his name by ascribing his
power to a Satanic source, ch. 11:15, will be regarded as
guilty of an unpardonable sin. This would not apply to
such as in ignorance rejected Jesus, but to those who had
full opportunity of knowing him, and who then scoffed at
his claims and maliciously insulted his divine Person, and
made of him an impostor and associated him with the
powers of evil. V. 10.
</p>

<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>

<p>
Last of all, in spite of opposition and threats of all the
earthly powers, and in the presence of the most imposing
tribunals, the witnesses of Jesus never need fear, and must
never allow themselves to be silenced. The Holy Spirit,
whom their enemies opposed and blasphemed, would speak
through them; he would teach them both how and what to
say, vs. 11, 12. This promise was not designed to encourage
indolence or lack of possible preparation, but to assure
the Christian witness that a divine Presence would ever
give him needed wisdom and strength and grace.
</p>

<p>
It is a grave responsibility to testify for Christ, but it is
the duty of everyone who bears his name; and in this service
he can be assured that the influence will be measureless,
the protection unfailing, the reward heavenly, the sustaining
grace divine.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>10. A Warning Against Covetousness. Ch. 12:13-21</head>

<quote rend="display">
13 And one out of the multitude said unto him, Teacher,
bid my brother divide the inheritance with me. 14 But he
said unto him, Man, who made me a judge or a divider over
you? 15 And he said unto them, Take heed, and keep yourselves
from all covetousness: for a man's life consisteth not
in the abundance of the things which he possesseth. 16 And
he spake a parable unto them, saying, The ground of a certain
rich man brought forth plentifully: 17 and he reasoned
within himself, saying, What shall I do, because I have not
where to bestow my fruits? 18 And he said, This will I do:
I will pull down my barns, and build greater; and there will
I bestow all my grain and my goods, 19 And I will say to
my soul, Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years;
take thine ease, eat, drink, be merry 20 But God said unto
him, Thou foolish one, this night is thy soul required of thee;
and the things which thou hast prepared, whose shall they
be? 21 So is he that layeth up treasure for himself, and is
not rich toward God.
</quote>

<p>
The parable of the Rich Fool was related by our Lord to
teach that riches neither form the real content nor assure
the continuance of life, so that it is the sheerest folly to seek
for gold while forgetting God.
</p>

<p>
A man had come to Jesus with the request, <q>Teacher, bid
my brother divide the inheritance with me.</q> The reply
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
implied that the Master regarded his work as spiritual, and
that he was not willing to invade the sphere of civil law or
to usurp the place of regularly appointed authorities,
<q>Man, who made me a judge or a divider over you?</q>
</p>

<p>
Possibly this reply contains a message for the modern
day and warns us against confusing the functions of the
Church with those of the State. The sphere of the Church
is spiritual, and its province is not to determine questions
which are commercial and political. The Church, however,
does provide and inculcate principles which are involved
in all moral questions and which determine justice
and right in every sphere of human life. Thus Jesus refused
to <q>divide the inheritance,</q> but he pierced to the
root of the request and saw that the man was neglecting
the civil law and seeking the support of a religious teacher
because he was moved by avarice; and it is this same
<q>love of money</q> which lies at the root of most of the
injustice and inequity and cruelty which burden the world
to-day.
</p>

<p>
Therefore Jesus turned to the multitude with the warning:
<q>Take heed, and keep yourselves from all covetousness:
for a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the
things which he possesseth.</q> To enforce his message
Jesus told the story of the rich man who was heaping up
goods for selfish enjoyment in future years, and who was
suddenly confronted by the necessity which death brings
of leaving to others all that he had amassed. His foolishness
consisted in forgetting that fortune and life itself are
dependent upon the will of God, and that a man really
owns nothing but owes everything to God, and that the
real value of life consists in the unselfish use of wealth and
of opportunity according to the will of God. How his vain
words, <q>my fruits,</q> <q>my barns,</q> <q>my grains,</q> <q>my goods,</q>
<q>my soul,</q> are contrasted with the solemn message: <q>This
night is thy soul required of thee.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>So is he,</q> continued Jesus, <q>that layeth up treasure for
himself, and is not rich toward God.</q> It is the sheerest
folly to forget that riches neither form the real content nor
assure the continuance of life; it is madness to heap up
goods while neglecting God.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>11. The Cure of Anxiety. Ch. 12:22-34</head>

<quote rend="display">
22 And he said unto his disciples, Therefore I say unto
you, Be not anxious for <hi rend='italic'>your</hi> life, what ye shall eat; nor yet
for your body, what ye shall put on. 23 For the life is more
than the food, and the body than the raiment. 24 Consider
the ravens, that they sow not, neither reap; which have no
store-chamber nor barn; and God feedeth them: of how much
more value are ye than the birds! 25 And which of you by
being anxious can add a cubit unto the measure of his life?
26 If then ye are not able to do even that which is least, why
are ye anxious concerning the rest? 27 Consider the lilies,
how they grow: they toil not, neither do they spin; yet I say
unto you, Even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like
one of these. 28 But if God doth so clothe the grass in the
field, which to-day is and to-morrow is cast into the oven;
how much more <hi rend='italic'>shall he clothe</hi> you, O ye of little faith? 29
And seek not ye what ye shall eat, and what ye shall drink,
neither be ye of doubtful mind. 30 For all these things do the
nations of the world seek after: but your Father knoweth that
ye have need of these things. 31 Yet seek ye his kingdom,
and these things shall be added unto you. 32 Fear not,
little flock; for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you
the kingdom. 33 Sell that which ye have, and give alms;
make for yourselves purses which wax not old, a treasure in
the heavens that faileth not, where no thief draweth near,
neither moth destroyeth. 34 For where your treasure is,
there will your heart be also.
</quote>

<p>
In addressing the crowds Jesus warned them against
covetousness by speaking to them the parable of the Foolish
Rich Man who trusted in his goods and forgot God; he
now turned to his disciples to urge them to forget their
worries by trust in God. While a Christian must not be
selfishly absorbed in amassing wealth, he need not be anxious
about even the necessities of life. The reason is that
<q>the life is more than the food, and the body than the raiment,</q>
and therefore God who gave life and made the body
will surely provide food and clothing; he who did the greater
will not fail to do the less.
</p>

<p>
For an example of such providential care Jesus points
to the birds: without the <q>fruits</q> and the <q>barns</q> and the
<q>goods,</q> which failed to prolong the life of the rich man,
the ravens continue to live; <q>God feedeth them: of how
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
much more value are ye than the birds!</q> Of course we are
to be diligent and industrious and to exercise thrift and
foresight; but we are not to be anxious. Worry will not
prolong life; on the other hand, it is worry and not work
that kills. Therefore, if anxiety shortens life, it surely
will not supply the necessities of life; trust God for food.
Vs. 24-26.
</p>

<p>
So, too, as for clothing; if God robes in such beautiful
colors the perishable flowers of the field, will he not provide
garments for his own children? To be anxious about these
necessities is to imitate the heathen who know nothing of
God's providential care. We show ourselves to be his
children by our trust in him. Vs. 27-30.
</p>

<p>
However, while we are not to be absorbed in seeking
wealth, as the foolish rich man, or to be anxious about food
and raiment, as are men of the world, there is something
about which we should feel a deep concern, and that is the
Kingdom of God. If we seek and labor for its coming, we
can be sure that our Father will supply our temporal needs.
Even though at times we may be in peril and in want, we
can be certain that we are to share at last the blessedness of
that Kingdom. Vs. 31, 32. Therefore we should not be
absorbed in gathering the goods that perish, but by deeds of
sacrifice and works of charity, inspired by gratitude to God
and love to men, we are to lay up <q>treasure in the heavens</q>
which will never be stolen or destroyed; and as the heart
always follows its treasure, our thoughts will be turned
upward toward God; trust in his power and love will banish
our anxiety and free us from care. Vs. 33, 34.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>12. An Exhortation to Watchfulness. Ch. 12:35-48</head>

<quote rend="display">
35 Let your loins be girded about, and your lamps burning;
36 and be ye yourselves like unto men looking for their lord,
when he shall return from the marriage feast; that, when he
cometh and knocketh, they may straightway open unto him.
37 Blessed are those servants, whom the lord when he
cometh shall find watching: verily I say unto you, that he
shall gird himself, and make them sit down to meat, and
shall come and serve them. 38 And if he shall come in the
second watch, and if in the third, and find <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> so, blessed
are those <hi rend='italic'>servants</hi>. 39 But know this, that if the master of
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
the house had known in what hour the thief was coming, he
would have watched, and not have left his house to be broken
through. 40 Be ye also ready: for in an hour that ye think
not the Son of man cometh.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
41 And Peter said, Lord, speakest thou this parable unto
us, or even unto all? 42 And the Lord said, Who then is the
faithful and wise steward, whom his lord shall set over his
household, to give them their portion of food in due season?
43 Blessed is that servant, whom his lord when he cometh
shall find so doing. 44 Of a truth I say unto you, that he
will set him over all that he hath. 45 But if that servant shall
say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming; and shall begin
to beat the menservants and the maidservants, and to eat and
drink, and to be drunken; 46 the lord of that servant shall
come in a day when he expecteth not, and in an hour when he
knoweth not, and shall cut him asunder, and appoint his portion
with the unfaithful. 47 And that servant, who knew his
lord's will, and made not ready, nor did according to his will,
shall be beaten with many <hi rend='italic'>stripes</hi>; 48 but he that knew not,
and did things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few
<hi rend='italic'>stripes</hi>. And to whomsoever much is given, of him shall
much be required: and to whom they commit much, of him
will they ask the more.
</quote>

<p>
Our Lord had been warning his disciples against allowing
their minds to be absorbed in the selfish acquisition of
wealth, and against being anxious about needed food and
clothing; they were to be supremely concerned about his
Kingdom which would appear in glory at the time of his
return. As to the events preceding this return, as to its
circumstances and results, he taught them more definitely
just before his death; here he simply enjoined upon them
the attitude of watchfulness, implying that if his coming
was occupying their thoughts they would be kept at once
from worldliness and from worry, and would be diligent in
serving him.
</p>

<p>
He illustrated this attitude of heart and mind by two
parables, the parable of the Returning Lord and the parable
of the Thief. In the former, the master has been attending
a marriage, his servants are awake and clothed, the
house is lighted, and all are ready to receive him. So delighted
is he on his arrival to find them faithful that he is
ready to give any expression to his joy; he even is willing to
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
cause them to sit down and to partake of the banquet they
have prepared for him.
</p>

<p>
The second parable illustrates the truth that as the time
when a thief will come is unknown, therefore the only way
to act is to be ready at all times for his approach; therefore,
our Saviour added, <q>Be ye also ready: for in an hour that
ye think not the Son of man cometh.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Master here as elsewhere indicated that his return
was to be delayed; his absence was to be like a long night;
much must transpire, much be done before he would reappear,
but his followers must ever be prepared for his return.
This did not mean that they were to be nervously expectant
nor were they to be saying that the day of his coming was
just at hand; rather they were to be at their places of duty,
faithfully performing their tasks, and absorbed in the work
which the Master had given them to do.
</p>

<p>
This attitude of watchfulness, and of interest in the return
of Christ, should particularly characterize teachers
and leaders. This is the force of the question which Peter
now asked. He inquired whether all believers would share
equally in the blessings of the Lord's return; would not
those, like the apostles, who had been most prominent in
his service receive from him a greater reward? Jesus replied
that larger privileges imply greater temptations and
greater responsibilities. If a Christian minister has been
faithful in feeding his people with spiritual food, he will be
rewarded with even higher opportunities for service; but if
the long delay of his Lord's return shall make him forgetful
and unmindful of its reality, if he shall use his high position
selfishly or shall use his power unkindly, then when the
Master appears he will be punished with the utmost severity.
</p>

<p>
The chief advantage of a religious leader lies in his opportunity
for knowing more fully the teachings of Christ;
his superior knowledge, therefore, will be the ground of his
more terrible punishment in case of unfaithfulness; the
principle is abiding and applies in every sphere. <q>To
whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be required.</q>
</p>

<p>
Thus Christ taught that in the future there will be degrees
and gradations both of punishments and rewards.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>13. The Divisive Influence of Christ. Ch. 12:49-59</head>

<quote rend="display">
49 I came to cast fire upon the earth; and what do I desire,
if it is already kindled? 50 But I have a baptism to be baptized
with; and how am I straitened till it be accomplished!
51 Think ye that I come to give peace in the earth? I tell
you, Nay; but rather division: 52 for there shall be from
henceforth five in one house divided, three against two, and
two against three. 53 They shall be divided, father against
son, and son against father; mother against daughter, and
daughter against her mother; mother in law against her
daughter in law, and daughter in law against her mother in
law.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
54 And he said to the multitudes also, When ye see a cloud
rising in the west, straightway ye say, There cometh a shower;
and so it cometh to pass. 55 And when <hi rend='italic'>ye see</hi> a south wind
blowing, ye say, There will be a scorching heat; and it cometh
to pass. 56 Ye hypocrites, ye know how to interpret the face
of the earth and the heaven; but how is it that ye know not
how to interpret this time? 57 And why even of yourselves
judge ye not what is right? 58 For as thou art going with
thine adversary before the magistrate, on the way give diligence
to be quit of him; lest haply he drag thee unto the judge,
and the judge shall deliver thee to the officer, and the officer
shall cast thee into prison. 59 I say unto thee, Thou shalt
by no means come out thence, till thou have paid the very
last mite.
</quote>

<p>
Jesus had been warning the crowds against the peril of
selfish enjoyment and urging his followers to watch and to
labor for his return and his Kingdom; but he did not want
them to be deceived and to suppose that this Kingdom
could be established without conflict and delay. The
present age was to be one of strife and division, and the
Master himself was to be their innocent cause. Some day
he would return to bring justice and holiness and righteousness
to complete victory, and then he would be indeed the
Prince of peace.
</p>

<p>
Now, however, his coming into the world had cast upon
the earth the burning brand of division and strife. This
was so inevitable that Jesus had no regret that the fire was
already kindled; but it would not burst into a conflagration
until Jesus had been crucified, and he felt a pathetic impatience
to have that dreadful experience accomplished. As
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
Jesus emerged from that baptism of fire he would be the
torch which would set the world ablaze with conflict and
separation. This division would occur even in a home
circle of five: father and mother would be divided against
son and daughter and daughter-in-law.
</p>

<p>
Thus Christ, and specifically his cross, is now dividing
the world. Happy are those who interpret his message and
understand his mission and turn to him in repentance and
faith!
</p>

<p>
The multitudes, however, were still unbelieving, and
Jesus rebuked their stupid ignorance. He declared that
they could so interpret the signs of weather as to predict
correctly rain or drought, but they could not see in his
words and works the proofs that he was the Christ, the
Saviour of the world. However, he warned them to repent
before it was too late. They would have wisdom
enough to agree with an adversary while on the way to a
courtroom before sentence had been pronounced, much
more should they see that it was the part of wisdom to
seek peace with God before the day of mercy and grace had
passed.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>14. A Call to Repentance. Ch. 13:1-9</head>

<quote rend="display">
1 Now there were some present at that very season who
told him of the Galilæans, whose blood Pilate had mingled
with their sacrifices. 2 And he answered and said unto them,
Think ye that these Galilæans were sinners above all the Galilæans,
because they have suffered these things? 3 I tell
you, Nay: but, except ye repent, ye shall all in like manner
perish. 4 Or those eighteen, upon whom the tower in Siloam
fell, and killed them, think ye that they were offenders above
all the men that dwell in Jerusalem? 5 I tell you, Nay: but,
except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
6 And he spake this parable; A certain man had a fig tree
planted in his vineyard; and he came seeking fruit thereon,
and found none. 7 And he said unto the vinedresser, Behold,
these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree,
and find none: cut it down; why doth it also cumber the
ground? 8 And he answering said unto him, Lord, let it
alone this year also, till I shall dig about it, and dung it: 9
and if it bear fruit thenceforth, <hi rend='italic'>well</hi>; but if not, thou shalt cut
it down.
</quote>

<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>

<p>
At the very time when Jesus was urging upon his hearers
their need of repentance, a report was made of a cruel
slaughter of Galilæans at the hand of Pilate. It was expected
that Jesus would declare the poor sufferers to have
merited their fate, and that he would fall into the common
fallacy of supposing that exceptional suffering is a proof of
exceptional guilt on the part of men. Jesus, however, replied
that temporary exemption from suffering is a mark
of special grace on the part of God. All impenitent men
are certain to suffer, and deserve to suffer; if judgment has
not fallen the delay should be regarded as a merciful opportunity
to repent.
</p>

<p>
Jesus enforced the same truth by referring to a recent
calamity in which eighteen men had been crushed by the
fall of a tower. Their fate was not to be regarded as a sign
of their special sinfulness, but as a warning to others that
they would likewise suffer unless they repented of their
sins.
</p>

<p>
The Master had in mind the entire Jewish nation and
he further enforced his call to repentance by the parable
of the Fruitless Fig Tree. This was a true type of Israel,
but also a symbol of every impenitent soul. God mercifully
preserves and blesses and spares, but the day of mercy
will end. The nation, as the individual, which produces
no fruit of penitence and of righteousness is certain to be
cut down. While the opportunity is given, repentance
must be shown. <q>Now is the acceptable time; ... now
is a day of salvation.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>15. A Cure on the Sabbath. Ch. 13:10-21</head>

<quote rend="display">
10 And he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the
sabbath day. 11 And behold, a woman that had a spirit of
infirmity eighteen years: and she was bowed together, and
could in no wise lift herself up. 12 And when Jesus saw her,
he called her, and said to her, Woman, thou art loosed from
thine infirmity. 13 And he laid his hands upon her: and immediately
she was made straight, and glorified God. 14
And the ruler of the synagogue, being moved with indignation
because Jesus had healed on the sabbath, answered and
said to the multitude, There are six days in which men ought
to work: in them therefore, come and be healed, and not on
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
the day of the sabbath. 15 But the Lord answered him, and
said, Ye hypocrites, doth not each one of you on the sabbath
loose his ox or his ass from the stall, and lead him away to
watering? 16 And ought not this woman, being a daughter
of Abraham, whom Satan had bound, lo, <hi rend='italic'>these</hi> eighteen
years, to have been loosed from this bond on the day of the
sabbath? 17 And as he said these things, all his adversaries
were put to shame: and all the multitude rejoiced for all the
glorious things that were done by him.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
18 He said therefore, Unto what is the kingdom of God
like? and whereunto shall I liken it? 19 It is like unto a grain
of mustard seed, which a man took, and cast into his own garden;
and it grew, and became a tree; and the birds of the
heaven lodged in the branches thereof.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
20 And again he said, Where unto shall I liken the kingdom
of God? 21 It is like unto leaven, which a woman took
and hid in three measures of meal, till it was all leavened.
</quote>

<p>
A true follower of Christ will worship in public on the
Sabbath Day, for this was the custom of our Lord. On
one of these days he found occasion to reveal his sympathy
and power by releasing a poor woman who for eighteen
years had been bound by <q>a spirit of infirmity,</q> just as on
such occasions his word to-day brings deliverance to souls
bound by the power of sin.
</p>

<p>
It was his sympathy which prompted this act and further
led him to relieve the consciences of his hearers from
the burden of traditions placed upon them by false interpretations
of the Law. When the ruler of the synagogue
criticized Jesus, by addressing those whom the woman
represented, on the ground that such healing broke the
law of Sabbath rest, his hypocrisy and that of his sympathizers
was unmasked by the reply that where self-interest
prompted, they interpreted the Law so liberally as to allow
them on the Sabbath to loose their cattle which had been
bound but a few hours, while they refused to allow Jesus
to relieve a daughter of Abraham whom Satan had bound
for years. They were pretending to be zealous for the Law
while denying its essential principle of love. Their real
breach of the Law was shown both by their lack of sympathy
for the woman and their hatred of Christ. Their
interpretation of the Law was shown to be absurd, for it
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
prevented an act of mercy which, on the Sabbath, was not
only allowable but necessary. Jesus never intimated that
he would abolish the Sabbath; he only designed to restore
to it the true spirit of worship and love and liberty and joy.
</p>

<p>
In view of this gracious work of power the multitude rejoiced;
and Jesus spoke the parables of the Mustard Seed
and the Leaven, the former to indicate that his power yet
was to extend over all the earth and the latter that it was
to transform all human life. Some readers interpret the
former parable as indicating the unsubstantial forms that
Christianity at times assumes, and the latter the false
doctrine which at times permeates the Church. Whichever
interpretation one accepts, it is hardly wise to base
upon it any theories as to the order of events related to
the coming and Kingdom of Christ. All will agree that
small beginnings and invisible forces are not to be despised
or distrusted by the followers of the Christ who some day
will deliver the whole suffering creation <q>from the bondage
of corruption into the liberty of the glory of the children
of God.</q>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>B. The Second Stages. Chs. 13:22 to 17:10</head>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>1. The Narrow Door. Ch. 13:22-30</head>

<quote rend="display">
22 And he went on his way through cities and villages,
teaching, and journeying on unto Jerusalem. 23 And one
said unto him, Lord, are they few that are saved? And he
said unto them, 24 Strive to enter in by the narrow door: for
many, I say unto you, shall seek to enter in, and shall not be
able. 25 When once the master of the house is risen up, and
hath shut to the door, and ye begin to stand without, and to
knock at the door, saying, Lord, open to us; and he shall answer
and say to you, I know you not whence ye are; 26 then
shall ye begin to say, We did eat and drink in thy presence, and
thou didst teach in our streets; 27 and he shall say, I tell you,
I know not whence ye are; depart from me, all ye workers of
iniquity. 28 There shall be the weeping and the gnashing of
teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and
all the prophets, in the kingdom of God, and yourselves cast
forth without. 29 And they shall come from the east and west,
and from the north and south, and shall sit down in the kingdom
of God. 30 And behold, there are last who shall be first,
and there are first who shall be last.
</quote>

<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>

<p>
This is the first in a new series of incidents on the last
journeys of Jesus toward Jerusalem. He realized the
seriousness of the situation. He knew that he was offering
his salvation to the people for the last time, and
therefore he was making an effort to reach every possible
city and village with his message.
</p>

<p>
Some one among his hearers asked him the question,
<q>Lord, are they few that are saved?</q> He did not reply
directly but his answer implied that many Jews who expected
to be saved would be lost and many Gentiles whom
the Jews expected to be lost would be saved. Jesus likened
the blessings of his Kingdom to a banquet served in a palace.
The door into this palace is narrow, and many who
are invited refuse to pass in thereby; after a time this door
is shut, and then those who before have refused to enter,
intreat the Master of the house to reopen it, but in vain;
they are forever excluded, and are overwhelmed with remorse
and chagrin. The narrow door is that of repentance
and faith in Christ; the opportunity for entrance is present
but not endless; those who reject Christ will be excluded
from his Kingdom; among these will be many whose folly
will be specially apparent. In the parable they are represented
as pleading for entrance, and on the very ground
which condemned them. They are pictured as saying
that they had known Christ well; they had eaten in his
presence and he had taught in their streets. Why, then,
had they not accepted him? These privileges only increase
their guilt; and the Lord refused to recognize them
as his own. Thus did Jesus describe the exclusion from
his Kingdom of many Jews; and he added the equally surprising
statement of the reception of Gentiles: <q>They shall
come from the east and west, and from the north and south,
and shall sit down in the kingdom of God.</q>
</p>

<p>
Thus Jesus gave a very practical turn to the question
which had been asked in mere curiosity. It is not important
to know exactly how many will be saved; it is for each
who hears the gospel to place himself in that number, now
and at any cost. It is not enough that one lives in a
Christian land, and in a religious home, and possesses
knowledge of saving truth; each must repent and accept
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
Christ for himself. The sad truth is that many who, like
the Jews, have the largest religious opportunities are the
furthest from salvation: <q>There are last who shall be first,
and there are first who shall be last.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>2. The Message to Herod and the Lament Over Jerusalem.
Ch. 13:31-35</head>

<quote rend="display">
31 In that very hour there came certain Pharisees, saying
to him, Get thee out, and go hence: for Herod would fain kill
thee. 32 And he said unto them, Go and say to that fox, Behold,
I cast out demons and perform cures to-day and to-morrow,
and the third <hi rend='italic'>day</hi> I am perfected. 33 Nevertheless
I must go on my way to-day and to-morrow and the <hi rend='italic'>day</hi> following:
for it cannot be that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem.
34 O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killeth the prophets, and
stoneth them that are sent unto her! how often would I have
gathered thy children together, even as a hen <hi rend='italic'>gathereth</hi> her
own brood under her wings, and ye would not! 35 Behold,
your house is left unto you <hi rend='italic'>desolate</hi>: and I say unto you, Ye
shall not see me, until ye shall say, Blessed <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> he that cometh
in the name of the Lord.
</quote>

<p>
A report reached Jesus that Herod was threatening his
life. This report was brought by the Pharisees who hoped
that it would terrify the followers of Jesus and induce him
to flee to Jerusalem where he would fall into the hands of
the Jewish rulers.
</p>

<p>
Instead, Jesus sent to the king a message of defiance and
irony; it has no note of insolence, but reveals the courage
and indignation of a true man. <q>Go and say to that fox</q>&mdash;Jesus
thus addressed Herod because he saw the craftiness
of the king. Herod did not wish the disrepute of
killing another prophet so soon after the death of John,
but he wished his realm to be rid of one whom he regarded
as a dangerous leader; so he did not arrest Jesus but tried
to put him to flight. The Pharisees were asked to bear
this message to the king because Jesus saw that they were
one with the king in the malicious cunning of their report.
</p>

<p>
<q>Behold, I cast out demons and perform cures to-day
and to-morrow and the third day I am perfected.</q> Thus
Jesus declared that his time and task were divinely allotted;
no king could shorten the time till the task was
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
done. When his work was complete, then in his death
and resurrection the glory and grace and power of Jesus
would be made perfect. <q>Nevertheless I must go on my
way.</q> Jesus was to leave Galilee and Perea, the realm
of Herod, not because he feared the king, but in fulfillment
of his task which would take him to Jerusalem. The explicit
reference to Jerusalem was made in a tone of solemn
irony, <q>For it cannot be that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem;</q>
that city had a monopoly in murdering prophets;
it would be quite improper for Jesus to be killed in any
other place.
</p>

<p>
However, the reference to Jerusalem led Jesus to pronounce
a lament of touching pathos over the city he truly
loved. He saw that his rejection and death would hasten
the destruction of the city. He saw its doom already hovering
over it like a bird of prey. He gladly would have
given his divine salvation and protection, but his people
would not accept him. Now they would be left to their
own defense, that is to say, to the ruin which he alone
could have averted. Henceforth they would not see him
in his saving power until as a suffering and repentant
nation they would finally welcome his return as that of their
true Saviour and Lord. How Jesus always yearns to
bless and to deliver, and how often he is spurned and rejected
by those who need him the most!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>3. Jesus as a Sabbath Guest. Ch. 14:1-24</head>

<quote rend="display">
1 And it came to pass, when he went into the house of one
of the rulers of the Pharisees on a sabbath to eat bread, that
they were watching him. 2 And behold, there was before him
a certain man that had the dropsy. 3 And Jesus answering
spake unto the lawyers and Pharisees, saying, Is it lawful to
heal on the sabbath, or not? 4 But they held their peace. And
he took him, and healed him, and let him go. 5 And he said
unto them, Which of you shall have an ass or an ox fallen into
a well, and will not straightway draw him up on a sabbath day?
6 And they could not answer again unto these things.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
7 And he spake a parable unto those that were bidden, when
he marked how they chose out the chief seats; saying unto
them, 8 When thou art bidden of any man to a marriage feast,
sit not down in the chief seat; lest haply a more honorable man
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
than thou be bidden of him, 9 and he that bade thee and him
shall come and say to thee, Give this man place; and then thou
shalt begin with shame to take the lowest place. 10 But when
thou art bidden, go and sit down in the lowest place; that when
he that hath bidden thee cometh, he may say to thee, Friend,
go up higher: then shalt thou have glory in the presence of all
that sit at meat with thee. 11 For everyone that exalteth himself
shall be humbled; and he that humbleth himself shall be
exalted.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
12 And he said to him also that had bidden him, When
thou makest a dinner or a supper, call not thy friends, nor thy
brethren, nor thy kinsmen, nor rich neighbors; lest haply
they also bid thee again, and a recompense be made thee. 13
But when thou makest a feast, bid the poor, the maimed, the
lame, the blind: 14 and thou shalt be blessed; because they
have not <hi rend='italic'>wherewith</hi> to recompense thee: for thou shalt be
recompensed in the resurrection of the just.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
15 And when one of them that sat at meat with him heard
these things, he said unto him, Blessed is he that shall eat
bread in the kingdom of God. 16 But he said unto him, A
certain man made a great supper; and he bade many: 17 and
he sent forth his servants at supper time to say to them that
were bidden, Come; for <hi rend='italic'>all</hi> things are now ready. 18 And they
all with one <hi rend='italic'>consent</hi> began to make excuse. The first said unto
him, I have bought a field, and I must needs go out and see it;
I pray thee have me excused. 19 And another said, I have
bought five yoke of oxen, and I go to prove them; I pray thee
have me excused. 20 And another said, I have married a wife,
and therefore I cannot come. 21 And the servant came, and
told his lord these things. Then the master of the house being
angry said to his servant, Go out quickly into the streets
and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the poor and maimed
and blind and lame. 22 And the servant said, Lord, what
thou didst command is done, and yet there is room. 23
And the lord said unto the servant, Go out into the highways
and hedges, and constrain <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> to come in, that my house
may be filled. 24 For I say unto you, that none of those men
that were bidden shall taste of my supper.
</quote>

<p>
Luke pictures our Lord not as a severe ascetic but as a
man of human sympathies and social instincts, mingling
freely with his fellow men, worshiping with them in their
synagogues and eating with them in their homes. No
domestic scene in the life of our Lord is sketched with more
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
detail than that of the Sabbath feast in the house of a
Pharisee. Jesus is pictured as entering with the guests,
noting the ranks of society to which they belong, and taking
a leading part in their conversation. Yet he never for a
moment forgot his mission; he seized every opportunity
for delivering some needed message. Here his tones were
unusually severe, for he was among persons who, while
formally courteous, were in their hearts hostile to him; but
he showed to all his unfailing grace, and his desire for their
highest good.
</p>

<p>
While the guests were assembling Jesus saw a man suffering
from disease. He knew that the Pharisees were
watching him and would object to his effecting a cure upon
the Sabbath Day and he therefore turned to ask whether
a cure would be lawful. When they hesitated to reply,
he healed the sufferer and then rebuked their hypocrisy,
and warned against all insincerity in religion by reminding
these formalists that they would not hesitate on the Sabbath
to rescue a beast they owned; should they regard it
as sinful to deliver a human being from distress? Jesus
never encouraged breaking the Sabbath law, but he taught
that this law must be interpreted by love.
</p>

<p>
When the guests were seated and Jesus saw how they
chose for themselves the most desirable places, he took
occasion to rebuke selfish ambition and to give a lesson in
humility. Evidently, when Jesus advised a guest to <q>sit
down in the lowest place; that when he that hath bidden
thee cometh, he may say to thee, Friend, go up higher,</q>
he was not merely teaching good manners or worldly wisdom,
nor was he advising the pride that masquerades as
humility. He was stating the great law that among his
followers true lowliness and conscious unworthiness in the
sight of God are the real conditions of advancement and
honor; <q>For every one that exalteth himself shall be humbled;
and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then as Jesus looked around upon the company he took
occasion to teach a lesson in true charity. He told his
host&mdash;and there was something of playfulness in his voice&mdash;that
in selecting guests one should invite not only the
rich, lest he might be so unfortunate (?) as to receive an
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
invitation in return, but also the poor, who could not return
the favor. Here again, Jesus was not giving merely
rules of social hospitality; he was illustrating the great
spiritual principle of unselfish motives in all deeds of kindness.
We are not to confer benefits with a view to receiving
benefits in return.
</p>

<p>
However, Jesus did not mean literally to forbid inviting
rich guests to our homes or to insist that all feasts must be
confined to paupers, but to teach that no service is to be
rendered with the mere hope of personal gain. It is proper
and pleasant, it may be even profitable, to entertain
<q>friends</q> or <q>brethren</q> or <q>kinsmen</q> or <q>rich neighbors;</q>
but in none of these cases is such entertainment a
ground of merit for they may <q>bid thee again;</q> but if
kindness is shown to the poor or rich simply for their good
and with no thought of personal gain either present or
future, the deed will not be without its reward: <q>for thou
shalt be recompensed in the resurrection of the just.</q>
</p>

<p>
Possibly this reference or some similar reference called
forth from one of the guests the exclamation, <q>Blessed is
he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of God.</q> Jesus
took the occasion to give the parable of the Great Supper,
by which he illustrated the sinful folly of refusing to accept
his offer of salvation. In this story those who were bidden
to the feast at first feigned a willingness to come, but subsequently,
by their refusal and their flimsy excuses, they
showed their complete absorption in selfish interests and
their utter disregard for their host. However, their places
were filled with other guests, some of them poor and helpless,
from their own city; others were vagrants from the
highways and hedges beyond. Thus Jesus plainly pictured
the refusal by the rulers and Pharisees of his offered
salvation and its acceptance, first by publicans and sinners,
and then by despised Gentiles.
</p>

<p>
There was, however, a message for each one who heard
the story, and there is a message to-day for anyone who is
rejecting Christ. The Pharisees, by inviting Jesus to dine,
pretended to feel some sympathy for him as a prophet,
while in their hearts they hated him; and the very man
whose pious and sentimental remark about <q>the kingdom
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
of God</q> occasioned the parable, was unwilling to accept the
invitation to <q>eat bread in the kingdom of God</q> which
Jesus was presenting.
</p>

<p>
So there are those to-day who show an outward respect
for Christian truth and talk sentimentally about the Kingdom
of God, who, however, are so absorbed in selfish interests
and have so little real love for God that they refuse
the offer of salvation, while social outcasts and despised
heathen gladly accept the invitation to life and divine
fellowship and eternal joy.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>4. Counting the Cost. Ch. 14:25-35</head>

<quote rend="display">
25 Now there went with him great multitudes: and he
turned, and said unto them, 26 If any man cometh unto me,
and hateth not his own father, and mother, and wife and
children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also,
he cannot be my disciple. 27 Whosoever doth not bear his
own cross, and come after me, cannot be my disciple. 28 For
which of you, desiring to build a tower, doth not first sit down
and count the cost, whether he have <hi rend='italic'>wherewith</hi> to complete
it? 29 Lest haply, when he hath laid a foundation, and is not
able to finish, all that behold begin to mock him, 30 saying,
This man began to build, and was not able to finish. 31 Or
what king, as he goeth to encounter another king in war, will
not sit down first and take counsel whether he is able with ten
thousand to meet him that cometh against him with twenty
thousand? 32 Or else, while the other is yet a great way off,
he sendeth an ambassage, and asketh conditions of peace.
33 So therefore whosoever he be of you that renounceth not
all that he hath, he cannot be my disciple. 34 Salt therefore
is good: but if even the salt have lost its savor, wherewith
shall it be seasoned? 35 It is fit neither for the land nor for
the dunghill: <hi rend='italic'>men</hi> cast it out. He that hath ears to hear, let
him hear.
</quote>

<p>
As Jesus was journeying on toward Jerusalem the attending
crowds were increasing in size and in excitement.
The people imagined that he was about to establish a kingdom
in pomp and splendor and power, and in these glories
they expected to share. To remove the misunderstanding,
Jesus turned to declare the true conditions of discipleship.
His followers must expect sacrifice and suffering and
be willing to part with all they possessed, even with life
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
itself. When he declared that they must hate their kindred
and their own lives, he of course meant that they
must love them less than they loved him, regarding them
with aversion only in so far as they were opposed to him
or stood in the way of his service. To be his disciple one
must be willing to <q>bear his own cross,</q> which was a
symbol of suffering and of death; one must continually
yield his will to the will of Christ, no matter what hardship
or loss might be involved.
</p>

<p>
Jesus did not wish to discourage men from following
him, but warned them first to count the cost. This he
illustrated by referring to the folly of laying the foundation
for a building without first estimating the entire expense
and one's ability to meet it; he also stated, as a further
illustration, the rashness of entering a war without first calculating
what sacrifices must be made to win. Jesus did
not mean that it is better not to begin the Christian life
than to begin and fail, but that it is not wise even to begin
unless one first realizes that it involves a readiness to
renounce everything which the service of Christ may
demand. <q>So therefore whosoever he be of you that renounceth
not all that he hath, he cannot be my disciple.</q>
</p>

<p>
Nothing could be more useless than a worldly and selfish
and willful follower of Christ; he is like salt that has
lost its savor; he lacks the very essence of discipleship; he
can be of no possible service to his Lord.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>5. The Prodigal Son. Ch. 15</head>

<quote rend="display">
1 Now all the publicans and sinners were drawing near unto
him to hear him. 2 And both the Pharisees and the scribes
murmured, saying, This man receiveth sinners, and eateth
with them.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
3 And he spake unto them this parable saying, 4 What man
of you, having a hundred sheep, and having lost one of them,
doth not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go
after that which is lost, until he find it? 5 And when he hath
found it, he layeth it on his shoulders, rejoicing. 6 And when
he cometh home, he calleth together his friends and his neighbors,
saying unto them, Rejoice with me, for I have found my
sheep which was lost. 7 I say unto you, that even so there
shall be joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, <hi rend='italic'>more</hi>
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
than over ninety and nine righteous persons, who need no repentance.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
8 Or what woman having ten pieces of silver, if she lose one
piece, doth not light a lamp, and sweep the house, and seek
diligently until she find it? 9 And when she hath found it, she
calleth together her friends and neighbors, saying, Rejoice
with me, for I have found the piece which I had lost. 10 Even
so, I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of
God over one sinner that repenteth.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
11 And he said, A certain man had two sons: 12 and the
younger of them said to his father, Father, give me the portion
of <hi rend='italic'>thy</hi> substance that falleth to me. And he divided unto
them his living. 13 And not many days after, the younger son
gathered all together and took his journey into a far country;
and there he wasted his substance with riotous living. 14
And when he had spent all, there arose a mighty famine in
that country; and he began to be in want. 15 And he went
and joined himself to one of the citizens of that country; and
he sent him into his fields to feed swine. 16 And he would
fain have filled his belly with the husks that the swine did eat:
and no man gave unto him. 17 But when he came to himself
he said, How many hired servants of my father's have bread
enough and to spare, and I perish here with hunger! 18 I
will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, Father,
I have sinned against heaven, and in thy sight: 19 I am no more
worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy hired servants.
20 And he arose, and came to his father. But while he
was yet afar off, his father saw him, and was moved with compassion,
and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him. 21
And the son said unto him, Father, I have sinned against
heaven, and in thy sight: I am no more worthy to be called
thy son. 22 But the father said to his servants, Bring forth
quickly the best robe, and put it on him; and put a ring on
his hand, and shoes on his feet: 23 and bring the fatted
calf, <hi rend='italic'>and</hi> kill it, and let us eat, and make merry: 24 for this
my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is
found. And they began to be merry. 25 Now his elder son
was in the field: and as he came and drew nigh to the house,
he heard music and dancing. 26 And he called to him one
of the servants, and inquired what these things might be.
27 And he said unto him, Thy brother is come; and thy
father hath killed the fatted calf, because he hath received
him safe and sound. 28 But he was angry, and would not
go in: and his father came out, and entreated him. 29 But
he answered and said to his father, Lo, these many years
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
do I serve thee, and I never transgressed a commandment of
thine; and <hi rend='italic'>yet</hi> thou never gavest me a kid, that I might make
merry with my friends: 30 but when this thy son came, who
hath devoured thy living with harlots, thou killedst for him
the fatted calf. 31 And he said unto him, Son, thou art ever
with me, and all that is mine is thine. 32 But it was meet
to make merry and be glad: for this thy brother was dead,
and is alive <hi rend='italic'>again</hi>; and
<hi rend='italic'>was</hi> lost, and is found.
</quote>

<p>
The precious and matchless parable of the Prodigal Son
belongs naturally to Luke. Its literary charm, its tender
beauty, its deep human interest, its breadth of sympathy,
its perfect picture of the grace and love of God, all are in
peculiar accord with the purpose and genius of this Gospel.
</p>

<p>
The parable is linked with two others, the teachings of
which it includes and completes: the parables of the Lost
Sheep and of the Lost Coin. The occasion of all three
parables was the censure passed by the Pharisees upon Jesus
because of his association with social outcasts and his cordial
welcome to penitent sinners. Jesus rebuked his enemies
by showing that it is natural to rejoice in the recovery
of a lost sheep or a lost coin or a lost son: much more, then,
must God rejoice in the recovery of a lost soul. Evidently
they who fail to share his joy must be out of sympathy and
fellowship with him.
</p>

<p>
The first parable reveals the love of God in depicting his
compassion for the distress and helplessness of the sinner.
The second shows how precious a lost soul is in the sight of
the loving God. Both of them picture his yearning and
patient effort for the recovery of the sinner and his abounding
joy in the restoration of the lost. The statement
that <q>there shall be joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth,
more than over ninety and nine righteous persons,
who need no repentance,</q> is not to be interpreted too literally.
It does not mean that God finds more satisfaction in
a repentant sinner than in a sinless saint. Jesus was here
referring definitely to the penitent publicans and to the
self-righteous Pharisees. God did not take delight in the
sins of the former, nor did he regard the state of the latter
as perfect, even taking the Pharisees at their best and regarding
them as faithful to the laws of God. Whatever
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
its motive, morality is always better than lawlessness and
impurity. However, a repentant sinner who understands
the grace and mercy of God is always more pleasing to him
than the Pharisee, proud, critical, and unloving, however
correct he may be in his moral behavior.
</p>

<p>
This truth is made more plain in the parable of the Prodigal
Son. Here we have perfectly described the experience
of the repentant sinner and also the unsympathetic attitude
of the disdainful Pharisee. The first is represented
in the story by the prodigal and the second by the conduct
of his elder brother.
</p>

<p>
In describing the waywardness of this younger son, Jesus
gave a complete picture of the character and consequences
of sin. Some have thought that the parable of the Lost
Sheep indicates that sin is due in part to ignorance and folly
and that the parable of the Lost Coin shows that it may be
occasioned by misfortune or accident. The parable of the
Prodigal Son, however, shows that it is usually due to willful
choice and to a desire for indulgence. Its results are
sketched in appalling colors. We are shown all its disillusion,
suffering, slavery, and despair. As a picture of the
inevitable consequences of sin, no touch could be added
to the scene of the prodigal in the far country when he had
spent all, when the famine had arisen, when he had sold
himself to feed swine and was unable to be satisfied even
with the coarse food he was providing for beasts.
</p>

<p>
Nor is there any more beautiful picture of repentance
than was drawn when the Master described the prodigal
as <q>he came to himself,</q> his sin had not been mere folly, it
had been madness. He remembered a former time of joy
and plenty in his early home. He realized his present desperate
need; he resolved to arise and go to his father. Most
of all, he saw that his offense had been not only against a
loving, earthly parent but against God, and that he was
wholly undeserving of fellowship with his father. Repentance
is not only sorrow for sin; it is an acknowledgment
that the offense has been committed against a holy God; it
is a change of heart toward him, and a resolution for a new
life which manifests itself in definite action. <q>He arose,
and came to his father.</q>
</p>

<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>

<p>
Strictly speaking, this is the end of the parable of the
Prodigal Son. In another sense the most beautiful part
immediately follows. It is a description of the matchless
love shown by God to every repentant soul. The father
had never ceased to love the prodigal or to hope and yearn
for his return. He had been eagerly looking for his wayward
son. The first sight of the prodigal filled his heart
with compassion; he <q>ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed
him.</q> The prodigal was ready to confess his fault, but the
father scarcely heard his words as he commanded the servants
to <q>bring forth quickly the best robe, and put it on
him; and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet: and
bring the fatted calf, and kill it, and let us eat, and make
merry.</q> It is a picture not only of pardon but of complete
restoration. It assures the sinner that as he turns to God
he will be received into the closest fellowship of a son and
heir and that his return will give joy to the heart of God
who will regard him as one that <q>was dead, and is alive
again,</q> as one who <q>was lost, and is found.</q>
</p>

<p>
The picture of the elder son is exquisitely sketched. It
was unquestionably intended to describe the loveless
Pharisees who envied the joy of the repentant publicans
and sinners. It furthermore brings a message to all persons
in every age to whom religion is merely a matter of
unwilling obedience and of loveless faithfulness to the laws
of God. It depicts souls out of fellowship with God, feeling
no real joy in his service and sharing none of his gladness
in the salvation of lost souls.
</p>

<p>
The elder brother knew nothing of the experience of a
true son. He was merely a slave. When the prodigal returned
he was not watching with his father, he was <q>in the
field;</q> when he learned that his brother had been welcomed
to the home he was filled with anger. He refused to enter
the house and when his father came out to entreat him, he
accused him of partiality and unkindness. His words described
admirably the self-righteousness of the Pharisees,
<q>I never transgressed a commandment of thine;</q> they also
show how little he appreciated his true privileges, <q>thou
never gavest me a kid.</q> The reply of his father intimates
the possibilities which he never had appreciated and the
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
privileges which he never had enjoyed, <q>Son, thou art
ever with me, and all that is mine is thine.</q> It had always
been possible for the Pharisees to enjoy the grace and
mercy and love of God; but to them religion had been a
mere burdensome round of rites and duties. It had given
no satisfaction, no gladness, to their hearts. Something of
their experience is paralleled even by Christians of the present
day. Failing to appreciate the gracious pardon of God
and his willingness to supply every spiritual need, forgetting
the possibility of living in daily communion and fellowship
with him, knowing nothing of his joys in the salvation
and repentance of lost souls, they are seeking in
their own strength, wearily and joylessly, to do the things
that they believe to be right and to obey the commands of
God, but their lives are like those of servants, not like the
free, joyous, loving experience of true sons.
</p>

<p>
Possibly the most artistic touch in the parable is its
abrupt close. We do not know whether the elder son
yielded to the entreaty of his father or not. It was an
appeal to the Pharisees; would they accept the grace of
God and further his plans for the salvation of the lost, or
would they continue to criticize and envy the repentant
sinner? Shall we live as servants or as sons?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>6. The Unrighteous Steward. Ch. 16:1-13</head>

<quote rend="display">
1 And he said also unto the disciples, There was a certain
rich man, who had a steward; and the same was accused unto
him that he was wasting his goods. 2 And he called him, and
said unto him, What is this that I hear of thee? render the account
of thy stewardship; for thou canst be no longer steward.
3 And the steward said within himself, What shall I do, seeing
that my lord taketh away the stewardship from me? I have
not strength to dig; to beg I am ashamed. 4 I am resolved
what to do, that, when I am put out of the stewardship, they
may receive me into their houses. 5 And calling to him each
one of his lord's debtors, he said to the first, How much owest
thou unto my lord? 6 And he said, A hundred measures of oil.
And he said unto him, Take thy bond, and sit down quickly
and write fifty. 7 Then said he to another, And how much
owest thou? And he said, A hundred measures of wheat.
He saith unto him, Take thy bond, and write fourscore.
</quote>

<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>

<quote rend="display">
8 And his lord commended the unrighteous steward because
he had done wisely: for the sons of this world are for their own
generation wiser than the sons of the light. 9 And I say unto
you, Make to yourselves friends by means of the mammon of
unrighteousness; that, when it shall fail, they may receive
you into the eternal tabernacles. 10 He that is faithful in a
very little is faithful also in much: and he that is unrighteous
in a very little is unrighteous also in much. 11 If therefore
ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who
will commit to your trust the true <hi rend='italic'>riches</hi>? 12 And if ye have
not been faithful in that which is another's, who will give you
that which is your own? 13 No servant can serve two masters:
for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else
he will hold to one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve
God and mammon.
</quote>

<p>
The parable of the Unrighteous Steward is often regarded
as the most perplexing of all the parables of our
Lord. It seems to picture a man who robbed his master
and received his master's praise and was pointed to by
Jesus as an example for his followers; further, it seems to
indicate that a place in heaven can be purchased with
money. A more careful reading shows that the praise was
bestowed, not for dishonesty, but for prudence and foresight,
that our Lord would have his followers imitate these
good qualities in a bad man, and further that it is possible
to use wealth so generously as to secure endless satisfaction
and joy.
</p>

<p>
The story is that of a steward or a trustee who was in
charge of the property of a rich landowner. Report had
reached his master of the extravagance and dishonesty of
this servant. An account was demanded and he was certain
to lose his position. However, he seized on the opportunity
which was still his so to use the wealth intrusted
to him as to secure friends who would provide a home for
him when his stewardship had been lost.
</p>

<p>
The story is intended to illustrate the stewardship of
wealth. No money is really owned by a follower of Christ;
it is simply intrusted to him to be wisely used in accordance
with the will of the Master. For its use a strict account
must some day be made. It will, therefore, be the
part of wisdom and of prudence so to use that which is now
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
intrusted that in the eternity to come there will be no regret
but only joy for the way in which wealth was employed.
In the parable the steward was guilty of fraud, as he reduced
the debts of those who owed money to his master.
He was really using for his future benefit money which was
not his own. Of course the Christian is to act with scrupulous
honesty; nevertheless, as he benefits others by his
generous gifts, he really is using money which belongs to
the Lord, but of course he is using it in accordance with the
will of his Master.
</p>

<p>
In applying the parable, Jesus indicated that the right
use of money, which seeks the welfare of others, applies not
only to the rich but also to the poor, <q>He that is faithful in
a very little is faithful also in much.</q>
</p>

<p>
Jesus further indicated that the stewardship which all
Christians now enjoy is a training for larger service in the life
to come. <q>If therefore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous
mammon, who will commit to your trust the
true riches?</q>
</p>

<p>
The motive which inspires fidelity as stewards is that of
love. The difficulty with the dishonest servant was that
he was disloyal to his master and was really seeking to
serve himself. One who really loves his Lord will be faithful
in the use of that which is intrusted to him. The danger
of stewards is that of divided allegiance. <q>No servant
can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and
love the other; or else he will hold to one, and despise the
other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>7. The Rich Man and Lazarus. Ch. 16:14-31</head>

<quote rend="display">
14 And the Pharisees, who were lovers of money, heard all
these things; and they scoffed at him. 15 And he said unto
them, Ye are they that justify yourselves in the sight of men;
but God knoweth your hearts: for that which is exalted among
men is an abomination in the sight of God. 16 The law and
the prophets <hi rend='italic'>were</hi> until John: from that time the gospel of the
kingdom of God is preached, and every man entereth violently
into it. 17 But it is easier for heaven and earth to pass away,
than for one tittle of the law to fall.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
18 Every one that putteth away his wife, and marrieth another,
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
committeth adultery: and he that marrieth one that is
put away from a husband committeth adultery.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
19 Now there was a certain rich man, and he was clothed
in purple and fine linen, faring sumptuously every day: 20
and a certain beggar named Lazarus was laid at his gate, full
of sores, 21 and desiring to be fed with the <hi rend='italic'>crumbs</hi> that fell
from the rich man's table; yea, even the dogs came and licked
his sores. 22 And it came to pass, that the beggar died, and
that he was carried away by the angels into Abraham's
bosom: and the rich man also died, and was buried. 23 And in
Hades he lifted up his eyes, being in torments, and seeth
Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom. 24 And he cried
and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus,
that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my
tongue; for I am in anguish in this flame. 25 But Abraham
said, Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy
good things, and Lazarus in like manner evil things: but now
here he is comforted, and thou art in anguish. 26 And besides
all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed, that
they that would pass from hence to you may not be able, and
that none may cross over from thence to us. 27 And he said,
I pray thee therefore, father, that thou wouldst send him to
my father's house; 28 for I have five brethren; that he may
testify unto them, lest they also come into this place of torment.
29 But Abraham saith, They have Moses and the
prophets; let them hear them. 30 And he said, Nay, father
Abraham: but if one go to them from the dead, they will repent.
31 And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and
the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, if one rise from
the dead.
</quote>

<p>
The parable of the Unrighteous Steward was intended to
teach the possibility of the right use of wealth. The parable
of the Rich Man and Lazarus was designed by our
Lord to warn his hearers against its abuse. Between the
two parables Luke records a number of sayings, the connection
of which cannot be determined beyond question
but they seem to have been quoted by him as an introduction
to the second of these parables, vs. 14-18. They
contain a rebuke of the Pharisees for their besetting sin of
avarice and a statement of the unfailing authority of the
Law, the letter of which they observed, but by the spirit of
which they were condemned.
</p>

<p>
These Pharisees ridiculed our Lord for teaching the absolute
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
necessity of generosity and benevolence and the
unselfish use of wealth. Our Lord replied that while these
enemies of his might receive the approval of men, God read
their hearts and many who received human praise were but
abominable in the sight of God. Jesus stated that while
the gospel message did differ from the Law and while many
were eagerly accepting its blessed privileges, it did not set
aside the Law, but only showed how its demands could be
met. When he stated that <q>one tittle of the law</q> could
not fall, he referred to the minute projections which distinguish
Hebrew letters, and meant that the slightest requirement
of the Law was sacred and abiding. He illustrated
these truths by a reference to the Seventh Commandment,
and insisted that adultery did not lose its
sinful character because of any interpretation of the Law
such as was put upon it by those who were teaching lax
theories of divorce. It was still sinful, even when justified
by civil enactment. Thus Jesus was reminding the Pharisees
that the Law might abide and be sacred even when
legalists who observed its letter were condemned.
</p>

<p>
In the parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus, Jesus by
no means taught that it is sinful to be rich or that the poor
are all saved. He did mean to suggest the solemn peril of
the selfish use of wealth. The sin of the rich man did not
consist either in the way in which he had acquired his
wealth or in the fact that he possessed it, nor yet in any
breach of moral law, but in the plain statement that while
he was living in selfish luxury one who was in sore need lay
unrelieved at his door. The rich man is commonly called
Dives, the Latin name for <q>a man of wealth.</q> Lazarus is
the only person in any parable of our Lord to whom a special
name is given. It is just possible that the name was
intended to indicate the character of the man as one who
trusted in the help of God. The story shows not only the
contrast between the two men in the present life, but the
still greater contrast in the life that is to come. The picture
is not to be interpreted with absurd literalness; but it
does contain a serious warning, and behind its figures of
speech are solemn realities. It does indicate the remorse
and the anguish which forever may be experienced by those
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
who upon earth make only a selfish and heartless use of
wealth and position and opportunity. The consequences
are shown to be as endless as they are distressing. A time
of reversal is to come, a time of judgment and retribution.
</p>

<p>
It is evident that Jesus was especially warning the
Pharisees; the rich man was a representative of this class
who were notorious for their scrupulous observance of law
and for their lives of selfish luxury and indulgence. The
rich man addressed Abraham as his father, and was addressed
by Abraham as his son. This is an intimation that
the most orthodox Jew might be lost and come at last to a
place of torment.
</p>

<p>
As the rich man requested that a special warning be sent
to his brethren, it is possible that he was expressing his
sympathy; more probably he was making an excuse and
intimating that had he been given more light he would not
have so grievously sinned. The reply is, therefore, very
significant, <q>If they hear not Moses and the prophets,
neither will they be persuaded, if one rise from the dead.</q>
It was an answer to the Pharisees for their continual request
that Jesus should give some striking sign by which
they would recognize his divine mission. Our Lord indicated
that a striking prodigy or miracle will never convince
those whose hearts are not right with God. He declared
further that the Law and the Prophets plainly set
forth the divine requirement of love. One who fails to observe
this supreme law in the use of wealth and of all similar
opportunities and privileges is under condemnation and
is in peril of eternal pain.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>8. Warnings to the Disciples. Ch. 17:1-10</head>

<quote rend="display">
1 And he said unto his disciples, It is impossible but that
occasions of stumbling should come; but woe unto him,
through whom they come! 2 It were well for him if a millstone
were hanged about his neck, and he were thrown into
the sea, rather than that he should cause one of these little
ones to stumble. 3 Take heed to yourselves: if thy brother
sin, rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him. 4 And if he
sin against thee seven times in the day, and seven times turn
again to thee, saying, I repent; thou shalt forgive him.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
5 And the apostles said unto the Lord, Increase our faith.
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
6 And the Lord said, If ye had faith as a grain of mustard seed,
ye would say unto this sycamine tree, Be thou rooted up, and
be thou planted in the sea; and it would obey you. 7 But who
is there of you, having a servant plowing or keeping sheep,
that will say unto him, when he is come in from the field, Come
straightway and sit down to meat; 8 and will not rather say
unto him, Make ready wherewith I may sup, and gird thyself,
and serve me, till I have eaten and drunken; and afterward
thou shalt eat and drink? 9 Doth he thank the servant because
he did the things that were commanded? 10 Even so ye also,
when ye shall have done all the things that are commanded
you, say, We are unprofitable servants; we have done that
which it was our duty to do.
</quote>

<p>
After the severe rebuke given by our Lord to the Pharisees
in view of their selfish abuse of wealth, Luke records
four apparently disconnected warnings given to the disciples.
The first, vs. 1, 2, was against the peril of causing
others to sin. In this world of selfishness and of evil desire,
our Lord declared, it is inevitable that such offenses will be
committed, but he pronounced a solemn woe upon anyone
guilty of this grievous fault. He declared that it would be
better for such a person to be drowned in the sea rather
than to allow himself to become guilty of such a sin. The
death of the body is far preferable to the death of the soul.
Therefore, Jesus warned his followers lest they might lead
anyone astray or causes anyone to stumble, particularly
such as might be in years or experience less mature than
themselves. No age of the Church has been without its
tragedies in which power and influence have been selfishly
used to mislead innocent souls, and no life is beyond the
possibility of placing stumblingblocks in the paths of others
or of exerting even unconsciously influences which may
cause others to sin.
</p>

<p>
In the second warning, here recorded by Luke, vs. 3, 4,
Jesus guarded his disciples against lack of charity. He
intimated that his followers should be ready always to forgive.
He did not advise weakness or indifference to sin;
he suggested that a brother who offends may deserve and
should receive a rebuke. It is proper that he should be
made to feel and to appreciate his fault. Nevertheless, he
is to be treated with kindness and if he sincerely repents, he
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
is to be forgiven freely. Even if he repeats his sin with
frequency, no revenge is to be harbored against him. Jesus
suggested that his offense might be committed <q>seven
times in the day,</q> by which he meant an unlimited repetition
of the fault; even then if his repentance is sincere,
forgiveness must not be denied.
</p>

<p>
The twelve apostles, probably in view of the particular
responsibilities which rested upon them, turned to their
Master with the petition, <q>Lord, increase our faith.</q> The
reply contains a solemn warning, that there is need of such
increase, a far greater need than the petitioners realized.
Nevertheless, there is also in the reply a gracious promise.
They were lovingly rebuked for their lack of faith, but they
were reassured by a revelation of the unlimited power of
faith. Our Lord asserted that if they possessed real faith,
even so small as to be compared with one of the most minute
objects in nature, namely, <q>a grain of mustard seed,</q>
they would be able by a word to accomplish incredible results,
speaking figuratively, to cause a mulberry tree to be
rooted up and planted in the sea. The followers of Christ
to-day need to be reminded of these same truths, namely,
of the narrow limits to which faith is usually confined and
the unbounded possibilities which might be theirs if their
trust in Christ were more simple, more unquestioning, and
more real. Vs. 5, 6.
</p>

<p>
The fourth warning here recorded rebukes the pride, the
self-confidence, the desire for praise and for reward, which
too often characterize the followers of Christ. Jesus
taught that no human works, however perfect, give a claim
upon God, but are merely the fulfillment of duty. This
truth is set forth in the parable of the Unprofitable Servant.
Vs. 7-10. The word <q>unprofitable</q> does not mean worthless,
but merely implies one who has not gone beyond his
obligation or duty. The picture is that of a slave who has
labored faithfully in the field and who when the day is
done merely continues in the evening to accomplish his appointed
tasks. His master does not show any particular
gratitude to one who is doing that which he is expected to
do. He does not especially praise his servant for doing
the things commanded.
</p>

<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>

<p>
So in the case of every man, a life of the most blameless
holiness and love is no more than God requires. It is no
ground on which a special reward can be demanded. It is
no reason for expecting promotion or praise. To do less
would be to neglect an obvious duty, and to do more than
duty is impossible. While this parable rebukes all pride
and cuts off all merit of works, it is nevertheless true that
in other parables our Lord taught the certainty of rewards
which he is to grant faithful servants not as a matter of
compulsion on his part but in loving grace.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>C. The Last Stages. Chs. 17:11 to 19:28</head>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>1. The Samaritan Leper. Ch. 17:11-19</head>

<quote rend="display">
11 And it came to pass, as they were on the way to Jerusalem,
that he was passing along the borders of Samaria and
Galilee. 12 And as he entered into a certain village, there
met him ten men that were lepers, who stood afar off: 13 and
they lifted up their voices, saying, Jesus, Master, have mercy
on us. 14 And when he saw them, he said unto them, Go and
show yourselves unto the priests. And it came to pass, as they
went, they were cleansed. 15 And one of them, when he saw
that he was healed, turned back, with a loud voice glorifying
God; 16 and he fell upon his face at his feet, giving him
thanks: and he was a Samaritan. 17 And Jesus answering
said, Were not the ten cleansed? but where are the nine? 18
Were there none found that returned to give glory to God,
save this stranger? 19 And he said unto him, Arise, and go thy
way: thy faith hath made thee whole.
</quote>

<p>
The healing of ten lepers begins the closing cycle of incidents
which marked the last journeys of Jesus toward Jerusalem.
It is quite like Luke to record this miracle, for the
chief feature of the story is the gratitude and the blessing
of a Samaritan, and Luke is ever describing Jesus as the
Saviour, not only of the Jews, but of the whole human race.
</p>

<p>
There is in this miracle, however, another peculiar feature;
before the lepers were cured they were bidden to go
to the priests and to declare that the cure had been effected,
and <q>As they went, they were cleansed.</q> It required no
little faith to start upon that journey; but they started,
and their faith was rewarded. So to-day when men come
to Christ with their request to be delivered from sin, he
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
commands them to act as though the petition already
were granted, and with the act of faith comes the answer to
the prayer. The command of Christ involved a promise
and upon his promises we can always rely with absolute
safety.
</p>

<p>
One of the lepers <q>When he saw that he was healed,
turned back, with a loud voice glorifying God; and he fell
upon his face at his feet, giving thanks: and he was a
Samaritan.</q> There is something of surprise and sadness in
the question of Jesus as he saw this restored leper lying at
his feet: <q>Were not the ten cleansed? but where are the
nine? Were there none found that returned to give glory
to God, save this stranger?</q> It is always surprising to
find that ingratitude is so common among men. Nine out
of ten probably will forget every favor they may receive.
It is rare that one realizes and acknowledges his debt.
Still more sad it is to see so few among those who have accepted
the salvation of Christ showing real gratitude in
lives of joyous service and declaring that they are constrained
to live for him who died for them.
</p>

<p>
There was, however, for the Samaritan a glad word of
blessed assurance and promise, <q>Arise, and go thy way:
thy faith hath made thee whole.</q> Jesus either meant to
call attention to the means of the cure, namely faith in
himself, and so to nurture that germ of new life into fuller
trust in his divine person; or he meant to say that the
faith which first had secured the healing of the body and
which was manifested in the man's return and his gratitude
now secured for him the salvation of his soul. In either
case we are reminded that gratitude is often found where
least it is expected; that it is always pleasing to our Lord;
and that it is the certain condition of further blessedness
and joy.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>2. The Coming of the Kingdom. Ch. 17:20-37</head>

<quote rend="display">
20 And being asked by the Pharisees, when the kingdom
of God cometh, he answered them and said, The kingdom of
God cometh not with observation: 21 neither shall they say,
Lo, here! or, There! for lo, the kingdom of God is within you.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
22 And he said unto the disciples, The days will come, when
ye shall desire to see one of the days of the Son of man, and
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
ye shall not see it. 23 And they shall say to you, Lo, there! Lo,
here! go not away, nor follow after <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>: 24 for as the lightning,
when it lighteneth out of the one part under the heaven,
shineth unto the other part under heaven; so shall the
Son of man be in his day. 25 But first must he suffer many
things and be rejected of this generation. 26 And as it came
to pass in the days of Noah, even so shall it be also in the days
of the Son of man. 27 They ate, they drank, they married,
they were given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered
into the ark, and the flood came, and destroyed them all. 28
Likewise even as it came to pass in the days of Lot; they ate,
they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded;
29 but in the day that Lot went out from Sodom it rained fire
and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all: 30 after
the same manner shall it be in the day that the Son of man is
revealed. 31 In that day, he that shall be on the housetop,
and his goods in the house, let him not go down to take them
away: and let him that is in the field likewise not return back.
32 Remember Lot's wife. 33 Whosoever shall seek to gain his
life shall lose it: but whosoever shall lose <hi rend='italic'>his life</hi>
shall preserve it. 34 I say unto you, In that night there shall be two
men on one bed; the one shall be taken, and the other shall be
left. 35 There shall be two women grinding together; the one
shall be taken, and the other shall be left. 37 And they answering
say unto him, Where, Lord? And he said unto them,
Where the body <hi rend='italic'>is</hi>, thither will the eagles also be gathered
together.
</quote>

<p>
Either in mere curiosity or with a desire for debate the
Pharisees approached Jesus with a question as to when the
Kingdom of God would come. Jesus replied that it would
not come in such manner as they were expecting, nor would
it appear as a visible development of which they could say,
<q>It is here,</q> or <q>there,</q> for, in the person of the King, it
was already <q>in the midst</q> of them and they did not recognize
it. Thus when Jesus said, <q>The kingdom of God is
within you,</q> he could hardly have meant that it was in the
hearts of the hostile and godless Pharisees; nor is the familiar
and beautiful conception of the Kingdom as <q>a reign of
God in human hearts</q> thus expressed in the New Testament.
Jesus more probably meant that in his own person
and work the Kingdom was present. The essence of this
Kingdom is always spiritual and consists in <q>righteousness
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
and peace and joy.</q> It is to have, however, a future,
visible manifestation at the appearing of the King. The
question as to the time and manner of its coming is not to
be asked either to satisfy mere curiosity or to arouse controversy;
for men of the world, like the Pharisees, the important
fact is that Christ, who is ever a divine and spiritual
presence, is to be accepted as Master and Lord; his service
always issues in new and more blessed life.
</p>

<p>
To the disciples, who trusted him, it was possible for
Jesus to answer more in detail the question as to the coming
of the Kingdom which is to be inaugurated in splendor on
his return. He told them that they must expect first a
period of long delay in which their weary hearts would
often yearn for a single day of the coming glory and that
many deceivers would point to places and times of his appearing.
However, when he did appear it would be with
suddenness and unmistakable splendor, like the lightning
which in an instant flashes across the whole heaven.
</p>

<p>
First, however, this King who will then come to reign
must suffer and die; and the world which has rejected him
will not be expecting his return. When he does reappear
the race will be in the same carnal security, careless and
indifferent and absorbed in the usual occupations of life,
as were the men in the time of the Flood or the inhabitants
of Sodom in the day of its doom.
</p>

<p>
On the contrary, those who are to share the glories of the
Kingdom must be looking for their returning Lord. Their
proper attitude of mind is pictured by a series of acts; one
who is on the housetop is not to come down to secure his
goods; one in the field will not return to his house; they
will not look backward, but will go forth eagerly to
meet their Master in whom alone is their safety and their
hope.
</p>

<p>
It will be a time of certain separations even for those
most closely related; for example, two men will be sleeping
in the same bed: one will be taken and the other left; two
women will be sharing a common task: one will be taken
and the other left. This word <q>taken</q> is the same beautiful
expression found in the Gospel of John, where is
recorded Jesus' promise, <q>I ... will receive you unto
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
myself.</q> It speaks of the peace and joy and blessedness of
those who gladly welcome the coming of the King.
</p>

<p>
At a question from the disciples as to where such judgment
would take place, our Lord replied that it will be
universal; wherever the carcass is there the vultures will be
gathered together; where there is corruption and sin, there
will judgment fall. Yet this judgment will be followed by
the splendor of the Kingdom for which the followers of
Christ watch and pray and labor and wait.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>3. The Unrighteous Judge. Ch. 18:1-8</head>

<quote rend="display">
1 And he spake a parable unto them to the end that they
ought always to pray, and not to faint; 2 saying, There was in
a city a judge, who feared not God, and regarded not man: 3
and there was a widow in that city; and she came oft unto him,
saying, Avenge me of mine adversary. 4 And he would not
for a while: but afterward he said within himself, Though I
fear not God, nor regard man; 5 yet because this widow troubleth
me, I will avenge her, lest she wear me out by her continual
coming. 6 And the Lord said, Hear what the unrighteous
judge saith. 7 And shall not God avenge his elect, that cry to
him day and night, and <hi rend='italic'>yet</hi> he is longsuffering over them? 8
I say unto you, that he will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless,
when the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith on the
earth?
</quote>

<p>
The parable of the Unrighteous Judge was spoken in
direct connection with the instructions given to the disciples
by their Master in reference to his return. It is, therefore,
not merely a general exhortation to prayer, but to
prayer for the coming of Christ, and more specifically to the
confident expectation of this event and of the blessedness
which will result.
</p>

<p>
It does, however, contain a very real encouragement to
prayer and for all Christians and at all times. The argument
is this: If an unjust judge, who has regard for neither
God nor man, would yield to the importunity of an unknown
widow because he feared that she would annoy him
by her repeated requests, how much more will a just God
be ready to reward the persevering petitions of his own
loved ones who cry to him continually!
</p>

<p>
In spite of all the mysteries involved, the followers of
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
Christ should pray without ceasing, and with all importunity
should present their petitions with the assurance that
God does hear and in his own time will answer.
</p>

<p>
The particular force of the parable relates, however, to
the Church in her conscious weakness and loneliness, in
the age between the crucifixion and the second coming of
Christ. Jesus had just given a description of the world at
the time of his return. He had pictured the prevalent
carelessness and indifference and absorption in earthly
pursuits, and now he wished to encourage his followers to
be patient and to turn their hearts toward him in expectation
and prayer. The widow in the parable is not so much
requesting that an enemy should be punished as that she
should be given her property rights for which she is applying
to the judge. So the Church is pictured, not simply as
crying for vengeance upon persecutors, but rather as longing
and praying for all those blessings which have been
promised and which will be received at the coming of the
Lord.
</p>

<p>
There is a deep mournfulness in the question which
Jesus asked after expounding his parable, <q>Nevertheless,
when the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith on
the earth?</q> Will there still remain those who are true to
Christ, who love him and are looking for his return? The
very question is a solemn warning against the peril of being
overcome by prevalent worldliness and unbelief. However,
the answer is not to be given in a spirit of hopelessness
and pessimism and despair. The Church will always have
her adversaries, she ever will need to be on her guard
against the worldly influences by which she is surrounded.
However, there will always be those who are true to him
who has chosen them out of the world, and after long days
of weary waiting their hearts will rejoice in the sudden appearing
of the righteous judge who will bring with him
glories brighter than they have dared to ask or to expect.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>4. The Pharisee and the Publican. Ch. 18:9-14</head>

<quote rend="display">
9 And he spake also this parable unto certain who trusted
in themselves that they were righteous, and set all others at
nought: 10 Two men went up into the temple to pray; the one
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
a Pharisee, and the other a publican. 11 The Pharisee stood
and prayed thus with himself, God, I thank thee, that I am
not as the rest of men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or
even as this publican. 12 I fast twice in the week; I give tithes
of all that I get. 13 But the publican, standing afar off, would
not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote his
breast, saying, God, be thou merciful to me a sinner. 14 I
say unto you, This man went down to his house justified
rather than the other: for every one that exalteth himself shall
be humbled: but he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.
</quote>

<p>
The parable of the Pharisee and the Publican was designed
to teach humility not only in prayer but in every
estimate of oneself and in every approach to God. It
further contrasts the religion of form with the religion of
the heart. It shows that the way of penitence is the only
path to pardon and to peace.
</p>

<p>
It was not addressed to Pharisees, although it is a severe
exposure of the hypocrisy and self-deception of Pharisaism
of every kind. Jesus seems rather to have had in mind
some of his own followers; but whatever their class or profession,
Pharisees have their representatives in every age
and land. They are described as <q>certain who trusted in
themselves that they were righteous, and set all others at
nought.</q>
</p>

<p>
Such, indeed, was the Pharisee here described. He had
gone up to the Temple to pray; he stood in some conspicuous
place; he addressed God but he uttered no true prayer.
He began by saying, <q>I thank thee,</q> but he really addressed
himself. He rejoiced that in comparison with other men
he formed a class by himself. He declared all others to be
<q>extortioners, unjust, adulterers,</q> and as an example of
such sinners he pointed to the poor publican at whom he
was looking instead of looking to God. He boasted that
he had refrained from the sins of other men and also that
he had performed more good deeds than the law required.
Moses instituted no obligatory fast; but the Pharisee
fasted twice in the week. Moses exempted certain things
from the tithe; the Pharisee had tithed his entire income.
In other words, he had been better than God required. He
had placed God under obligation to him. How little does
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
such a man understand the real holiness of God, of the requirements
of that law the essence of which is love!
</p>

<p>
In striking contrast the publican was standing at a respectful
distance from the supposed saint whose formal
piety had impressed his fellow men. He did not venture
even to look toward heaven. He beat upon his breast, as a
sign of mourning, and cried out in anguish, <q>God, be thou
merciful to me a sinner.</q> The original words seem to
imply that he regarded himself as likewise distinct from all
other men. He felt and confessed himself to be <q>the sinner;</q>
but as he acknowledged his guilt and turned to God
in penitence, he was accepted as righteous in the sight of
God and received pardon and peace.
</p>

<p>
There can be no misunderstanding as to the lesson which
the Master wished to impress. <q>This man went down to
his house justified rather than the other.</q> A sense of
guilt and a yearning for pardon and a cry to God for mercy&mdash;this
is the very beginning of a new life; and however far
one may progress in holiness there is ever need of similar
humility. The nearer one is to God, the more conscious
is he of his sinfulness and the less likely to boast of his own
moral attainments. The more one acknowledges his unworthiness,
the better is he prepared to serve his Master
and his fellow men. The pride of Pharisaism on the part
of nations, as well as in the lives of individuals, stands in
the way of helpfulness and brotherhood and the favor of
God. What is needed to-day is universal repentance, a
manifestation of the humble and the contrite heart; <q>For
every one that exalteth himself shall be humbled; but he
that humbleth himself shall be exalted.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>5. Jesus Receiving Little Children. Ch. 18:15-17</head>

<quote rend="display">
15 And they were bringing unto him also their babes, that
he should touch them: but when the disciples saw it, they rebuked
them. 16 But Jesus called them unto him saying, Suffer
the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not:
for to such belongeth the kingdom of God. 17 Verily I say
unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as
a little child, he shall in no wise enter therein.
</quote>

<p>
This charming picture of Jesus blessing little children is
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
sketched by Matthew and Mark as well as by Luke. Its
attractiveness has given it a place on the canvas of many
an artist. Its symbolic message is being accepted by the
modern Church, <q>They were bringing unto him also their
babes.</q> The parents were probably carrying these children
in their arms. They realized that not only the lepers
and the infirm needed the touch of Christ, but that the
power of the Master would bring blessing to the children
as well.
</p>

<p>
This touch may properly picture that personal relation
and spiritual contact with Christ which to-day, with
equal eagerness, should be sought for their children by all
parents. <q>When the disciples saw it, they rebuked them.</q>
They seemed to have felt that children were too insignificant
to be allowed to interfere with the work or to demand
the attention of Christ. At this present time there are
many things which tend to keep parents from bringing
their children to the Master: custom and carelessness
and indifference and fear and diffidence; even friends
seem to play the part of those <q>disciples</q> and to conspire
to prevent and rebuke those who really long to see their
children brought into a sanctifying relationship to the
Lord. No problem of to-day is more important than the
removal of such barriers and obstacles. The Christian
nurture of children is the supreme need of the times. <q>But
Jesus called them unto him, saying, Suffer the little
children to come unto me, and forbid them not.</q> This
reply of the Master has cast an unfading halo about the
faces of all children. Their innocence and their need
made a special appeal to the Master. Should it not affect
us in like manner, and should we not feel that no work
is more Christlike and none more blessed than the care
of these little ones whom our Lord so truly loves? We are
the real servants of our Master only as we feel the appeal
of childhood and as we seek to supply to children their
physical and mental and spiritual needs.
</p>

<p>
<q>For to such belongeth the kingdom of God.</q> It is
theirs by right. It belongs not only to those particular
children whom Jesus was then blessing, not only to all
children in general, but to all of whatever age who are
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
childlike in their trust and dependence and purity. All
those who are intrusted to the care of the Master and
who accept his saving grace will find a place in his Kingdom.
</p>

<p>
As the crowds gazed in wonder and sympathy on this
tender scene, our Lord added this word of warning,
<q>Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a
little child, he shall in no wise enter therein.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>6. The Rich Ruler. Ch. 18:18-30</head>

<quote rend="display">
18 And a certain ruler asked him, saying, Good Teacher,
what shall I do to inherit eternal life? 19 And Jesus said unto
him, Why callest thou me good? none is good, save one, <hi rend='italic'>even</hi>
God. 20 Thou knowest the commandments, Do not commit
adultery, Do not kill, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness,
Honor thy father and mother. 21 And he said, All these
things have I observed from my youth up. 22 And when Jesus
heard it, he said unto him, One thing thou lackest yet: sell all
that thou hast, and distribute unto the poor, and thou shalt
have treasure in heaven: and come, follow me. 23 But when
he heard these things, he became exceedingly sorrowful; for
he was very rich. 24 And Jesus seeing him said, How hardly
shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God! 25
For it is easier for a camel to enter in through a needle's eye,
than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. 26 And
they that heard it said, Then who can be saved? 27 But he
said, The things which are impossible with men are possible
with God. 28 And Peter said, Lo, we have left our own, and
followed thee. 29 And he said unto them, Verily I say unto
you, There is no man that hath left house, or wife, or brethren
or parents, or children, for the kingdom of God's sake, 30
who shall not receive manifold more in this time, and in the
world to come eternal life.
</quote>

<p>
In contrast with the penitent publican and with the
loving trust of little children which Luke has been depicting,
there steps upon the scene a young man, rich, upright,
morally earnest, but apparently unconscious of the sinful
greed which threatened his soul and of that trust in riches
which might prevent his entering the Kingdom of God.
In spite of his riches, his youth, his position, and his power,
his heart was not satisfied. He had come to Jesus with the
question, <q>Good Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal
life?</q> Jesus at once rebuked him, <q>Why callest thou me
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
good? none is good, save one, even God.</q> By this reproof
Jesus was neither defending his own divinity nor denying
his sinlessness. He wished to convince the young man of
his moral need. He intimated that the thoughtless use of the
word <q>good,</q> addressed to one whom he regarded as a
human teacher, was a proof that the young man had a
superficial view of goodness. Judged by a divine standard
the young inquirer could not claim to be good, nor
can any man regard himself as righteous in the light of
divine holiness.
</p>

<p>
In order to awaken the conscience and to disturb the
complacent self-righteousness of the young inquirer,
Jesus now tested him in the light of the commandments
in which God has revealed his holy will. The youth at once
replied, <q>All these things have I observed from my youth
up.</q> Jesus now applied the deep probe which showed that
the man had never observed the spirit of the Law, even
though he believed that he had kept the letter. Jesus
disclosed the real selfishness of the heart as he proposed a
supreme test: <q>One thing thou lackest yet: sell all that
thou hast, and distribute unto the poor, and thou shalt
have treasure in heaven: and come, follow me.</q> In this
sentence Jesus convicted the man of having broken the
Law, the essential requirement of which was to love his
neighbor as himself.
</p>

<p>
Jesus promised an eternal recompense for sacrifice,
and he offers by his personal companionship the influence
and power which will make the keeping of the Law more
possible and complete. No one can claim to be righteous
when judged by the commandments as interpreted by
Christ. Our only hope is to come to him for guidance and
help. He will lay bare the secret selfishness of our hearts,
and will develop the spirit of love and service which forms
the essence of eternal life, and in heaven he will ultimately
recompense his followers for every loss.
</p>

<p>
Jesus does not demand that all who obey him must
literally leave their worldly possessions. In his command
to the rich ruler he was dealing with a specific case. He
does demand, however, that each one shall give up anything
which prevents open, honest discipleship and fellowship
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
with himself. In the case of this inquirer the obstacle
was his wealth. It was impossible for him to retain it
and yet to follow Christ. The Master made plain to him
that his goodness had been superficial and inadequate.
He showed him that love of money was the canker which
had been hidden in his soul. He plainly placed before
him the necessity of choosing between his wealth and the
eternal life which Jesus alone can give. No wonder that
when the young ruler heard the stern requirements and
realized for the first time that he was controlled by his
wealth, <q>He became exceeding sorrowful; for he was
very rich.</q> He kept his wealth and he rejected his Saviour.
He saw the possibility of eternal life, but he was not willing
to pay the price. He retained his riches, but he lost his
soul.
</p>

<p>
As Jesus looked upon him in pity, he startled his disciples
by the statement of a truth which the scene had illustrated:
<q>How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the
kingdom of God!</q> This was particularly surprising to the
Jews. They imagined that wealth was a positive proof
of divine favor. What then did Jesus mean? He did not
intend to teach that wealth is sinful or that private
property is a social wrong. He meant that riches may
possibly keep their possessor from Christian discipleship
and that one who seeks to satisfy himself with such
wealth as keeps him from Christ can never enter the
Kingdom of God. Jesus even added a pardonable hyperbole,
<q>It is easier for a camel to enter in through a needle's
eye, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.</q>
One who would enter that Kingdom must become as a
little child; he must abandon all trust in self, and be
willing to sacrifice anything which prevents his becoming
an obedient servant of Christ. When the disciples heard
this, they were astonished and asked, <q>Then who can be
saved?</q> Our Lord replied, <q>The things which are impossible
with men are possible with God.</q> It does require
resolution and decision and sacrifice, but God is ready to
supply all needed grace. His spirit can strengthen those
who turn to him in their conscious need and with a real
desire for a higher life.
</p>

<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>

<p>
As the rich man moved away sorrowfully in his costly
robes, Peter looked upon him with apparent scorn, and
turned to Jesus with the self-complacent remark, <q>Lo,
we have left our own, and followed thee.</q> The reply of
Jesus was not intended to encourage men to follow him
in hope of gain. His salvation is a matter of grace. We
are not to think that by any sacrifice of worldly goods we
can purchase eternal life. However, the tender words of
the Master do remind us that a rich recompense will be
received for all that we may surrender in becoming his
disciples. Even in this present time one receives a hundredfold
reward, not in literal kind but in experiences which
now satisfy the soul and <q>in the world to come eternal
life.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>7. Jesus Again Foretelling His Death. Ch. 18:31-34</head>

<quote rend="display">
31 And he took unto him the twelve, and said unto them,
Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and all the things that are
written through the prophets shall be accomplished unto the
Son of man. 32 For he shall be delivered up unto the Gentiles,
and shall be mocked, and shamefully treated, and spit upon:
33 and they shall scourge and kill him: and the third day he
shall rise again. 34 And they understood none of these things;
and this saying was hid from them, and they perceived not the
things that were said.
</quote>

<p>
As Jesus moved southward through Perea, nearing the
end of his last journey to Jerusalem, he was accompanied
by admiring multitudes, but his own heart was heavy
with the knowledge of the suffering that awaited him
and he clearly saw before him the outline of the cross.
Many of his followers to-day share his experience in part;
even in surroundings which all observers envy, their
hearts are crushed by secret sorrows and by the knowledge
of approaching pain.
</p>

<p>
Those who then were nearest to him were quite unconscious
of his thoughts or his need of sympathy. Then
for the third time Jesus clearly predicted his approaching
death. He declared that his sufferings were to be in
accordance with written prophecy and now more clearly
than ever he described the details of all the anguish he
must endure. He was to be <q>delivered up unto the Gentiles</q>
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
and therefore to be crucified, and with all the sickening
accompaniments of mockery and spitting and scourging,
he was to be killed.
</p>

<p>
Such a clear vision of what awaited him enhances for
us the revelation of his matchless heroism as he moved
forward with unfaltering tread, giving an inspiring example
to each one who may be asked to take up the cross and
come after him.
</p>

<p>
Such knowledge reveals one who consciously was more
than man, such a confidence that he was fulfilling the prophecies
of the inspired Scriptures shows that he regarded
himself as the Saviour of the world. Such a willingness to
suffer demonstrates the fact that he believed his atoning
death to be an essential part of his redeeming work.
</p>

<p>
The grave, however, was by no means his goal. With
absolute definiteness he declared that on the third day he
would rise again. This vision of triumph was in part the
explanation of his courage. It was in virtue of such a
resurrection victory that he could be the Saviour of mankind.
</p>

<p>
His disciples, however, understood none of these things;
with threefold emphasis Luke describes their dullness of
apprehension. They did not believe that his death was
necessary and for them the resurrection was not even a
dream. Their lack of expectation only made them more
credible witnesses of that resurrection when it did occur.
However, would not a clearer vision, unclouded by false
notions of their own, have enabled them to understand
their Master and to bring some cheer to his lonely soul;
and does he not always desire his followers to accept his
predictions with implicit faith and to rest upon his promises
with triumphant hope?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>8. The Blind Man at Jericho. Ch. 18:35-43</head>

<quote rend="display">
35 And it came to pass, as he drew nigh unto Jericho, a certain
blind man sat by the way side begging: 36 and hearing a
multitude going by, he inquired what this meant. 37 And they
told him, that Jesus of Nazareth passeth by. 38 And he cried,
saying, Jesus, thou son of David, have mercy on me. 39 And
they that went before rebuked him, that he should hold his
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
peace: but he cried out the more a great deal, Thou son of
David, have mercy on me. 40 And Jesus stood, and commanded
him to be brought unto him: and when he was come
near, he asked him, 41 What wilt thou that I should do unto
thee? And he said, Lord, that I may receive my sight. 42
And Jesus said unto him, Receive thy sight: thy faith hath
made thee whole. 43 And immediately he received his sight,
and followed him, glorifying God: and all the people, when
they saw it, gave praise unto God.
</quote>

<p>
As for the last time Jesus was journeying through
Jericho, he healed a blind man whom Mark in his record
names Bartimæus. This miracle was a proof of divine
power and an expression of human sympathy, but it was
also a parable of the ability which Jesus alone has of
giving sight to the morally blind and of imparting that
spiritual vision which is absolutely necessary if men are to
live in right relations to one another and to God. In
certain minor details Luke's account differs from those of
Matthew and Mark. The former mentions two blind men
and agrees with Mark in stating that the miracle occurred
as Jesus was leaving the city. Possibly Mark and Luke
refer to the best known of the two men and Luke may
designate the older of the two towns which bore the name
of Jericho. All agree, however, in picturing the pitiful
condition of the helpless man who because of his blindness
was reduced to beggary and was a true symbol of the misery
to which one is brought by the lack of spiritual sight.
</p>

<p>
Then there is the picture of the obstacles to be overcome,
of the doubts and difficulties that lie in the way of those
who seek to come under the healing influence of our Lord.
<q>They that went before rebuked him, that he should hold
his peace.</q> Often do those who yearn for light and healing
hear words which dishearten and suggestions which
lead to hopelessness and despair!
</p>

<p>
Again there is the picture of eager determination and
of unshaken faith. <q>He cried out the more a great deal,
Thou son of David, have mercy on me.</q> He had been
told that <q>Jesus of Nazareth</q> was passing by. He,
however, called him <q>Jesus, thou son of David.</q> He
recognized the Prophet of Nazareth as the promised
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
Messiah, the Saviour of the world, and when rebuked for
crying to him for mercy, he continued steadfast in his
faith and his confident trust that Jesus would sympathize
and heal.
</p>

<p>
Lastly, there is the picture of complete relief. The blind
man was not disappointed. Jesus said unto him, <q>Receive
thy sight: thy faith hath made thee whole.</q> How many
likewise have found Christ able and willing to give them
spiritual vision! Their eyes have been opened to behold
things unseen and eternal and they have been enabled
to follow the Master with joyful footsteps as they
journey toward the celestial city where they will see the
King in his beauty and will be like him when they <q>see
him even as he is.</q>
</p>

<p>
Such miracles of grace rejoice the hearts not only of
those who are healed; they occasion gratitude and joy to
countless others also as they are assured of the sympathy
and grace and divine power of the Saviour. As Luke here
states, <q>All the people, when they saw it, gave praise unto
God.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>9. The Conversion of Zacchaeus. Ch. 19:1-10</head>

<quote rend="display">
1 And he entered and was passing through Jericho. 2 And
behold, a man called by name Zacchæus; and he was a chief
publican, and he was rich. 3 And he sought to see Jesus who
he was; and could not for the crowd, because he was little of
stature. 4 And he ran on before, and climbed up into a sycomore
tree to see him: for he was to pass that way. 5 And when
Jesus came to the place, he looked up, and said unto him,
Zacchæus, make haste, and come down; for to-day I must
abide at thy house. 6 And he made haste and came down, and
received him joyfully. 7 And when they saw it, they all murmured,
saying, He is gone in to lodge with a man that is a
sinner. 8 And Zacchæus stood, and said unto the Lord, Behold,
Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor: and if I
have wrongfully exacted aught of any man, I restore fourfold.
9 And Jesus said unto him, To-day is salvation come to this
house, forasmuch as he also is a son of Abraham. 10 For the
Son of man came to seek and to save that which was lost.
</quote>

<p>
<q>And he entered and was passing through Jericho,</q>
a city famous alike for faith and unbelief. <q>By faith the
walls of Jericho fell down,</q> and in blind unbelief they
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
were rebuilt and the curse which had been pronounced
came upon the defiant builder. As Jesus passed through
the city he was to witness faith and unbelief, the latter
to be shown by multitudes, the former by a single man
named Zacchæus. This name signifies <q>holiness</q> but
it was a poor designation of the man. Those who knew
him best called him a <q>sinner,</q> and they were probably
right. <q>He was a chief publican, and he was rich.</q> A
man might be a publican and be honest, but he would
probably be poor. Zacchæus' task was that of a taxgatherer,
and when it is remembered that these officials
made their wealth by extortion and dishonesty, to say
the least, it was suspicious when a taxgatherer was rich.
</p>

<p>
<q>He sought to see Jesus who he was.</q> It may have
been curiosity, but there was a certain eagerness in his
desire. He possibly had heard of the great Prophet
who was so kind in his treatment of publicans and sinners.
However, he could not see Jesus <q>for the crowd, because
he was little of stature.</q> Obstacles often arise in the
way of those whose attention is first turned toward Christ.
If, however, they are earnest in their desire, they are
certain to learn more of him.
</p>

<p>
The earnestness of Zacchæus was shown as <q>he ran
on before, and climbed up into a sycomore tree to see
him.</q> There was something undignified in the action
of this little man of wealth, but his eagerness received an
unexpected reward, for <q>When Jesus came to the place
he looked up, and said unto him, Zacchæus, make haste,
and come down; for to-day I must abide at thy house.</q>
This is the only time so far as we know that Jesus invited
himself to be a guest, but we are certain that he is ever
ready to abide with those whose hearts are open to receive
him. It has been said that Zacchæus was converted
before he had reached the ground. There can be no doubt
that a great change came into his heart as he realized how
fully Jesus knew him and anticipated what the Saviour
could do for him; and his faith and hope were manifest
at once. <q>He made haste, and came down, and received
him joyfully.</q>
</p>

<p>
What did the crowd say? Exactly what the world
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
always says when a man is turning to Christ and seeking
to begin a new life. Men always call to mind the dark
past from which the rescued man is turning. <q>They all
murmured, saying, He is gone in to lodge with a man
that is a sinner.</q>
</p>

<p>
What did Zacchæus say? What every man says who
has found the grace which Christ bestows and who realizes
that a new life can begin only with repentance and resolution.
<q>Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to
the poor.</q> Thus he determined, as a Christian, to do far
more than was required by the Jewish Law; that Law
required a tenth; Zacchæus promised that half of all his
income would be used in the service of the Lord. <q>And
if I have wrongfully exacted aught of any man, I restore
fourfold.</q> There can be little doubt that any publican
would find large opportunities for such restoration; and
nothing more definitely indicates true repentance than the
desire to make amends for the past.
</p>

<p>
What did Jesus say? This is most important of all,
<q>To-day is salvation come to this house, forasmuch as he
also is a son of Abraham.</q> By his faith the publican of
Jericho showed himself to be a true son of Abraham, the
<q>father of the faithful.</q> His trust in Christ secured for
him that salvation which is offered to all, even to the
lowest and most hopeless and despised. <q>For the Son of
man came to seek and to save that which was lost.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>10. The Parable of the Pounds. Ch. 19:11-28</head>

<quote rend="display">
11 And as they heard these things, he added and spake a
parable, because he was nigh to Jerusalem, and <hi rend='italic'>because</hi> they
supposed that the kingdom of God was immediately to appear.
12 He said therefore, A certain nobleman went into a far
country, to receive for himself a kingdom, and to return. 13
And he called ten servants of his, and gave them ten pounds,
and said unto them, Trade ye <hi rend='italic'>herewith</hi> till I come. 14 But
his citizens hated him, and sent an ambassage after him, saying,
We will not that this man reign over us. 15 And it came
to pass, when he was come back again, having received the
kingdom, that he commanded these servants, unto whom he
had given the money, to be called to him, that he might know
what they had gained by trading. 16 And the first came before
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
him, saying, Lord, thy pound hath made ten pounds more.
17 And he said unto him, Well done, thou good servant: because
thou wast found faithful in a very little, have thou authority
over ten cities. 18 And the second came, saying, Thy
pound, Lord, hath made five pounds. 19 And he said unto
him also, Be thou also over five cities. 20 And another came,
saying, Lord, behold, <hi rend='italic'>here</hi> is thy pound, which I kept laid up
in a napkin: 21 for I feared thee, because thou art an austere
man: thou takest up that which thou layedst not down, and
reapest that which thou didst not sow. 22 He saith unto him,
Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee, thou wicked servant.
Thou knewest that I am an austere man, taking up
that which I laid not down, and reaping that which I did not
sow; 23 then wherefore gavest thou not my money into the
bank, and I at my coming should have required it with interest?
24 And he said unto them that stood by, Take away
from him the pound, and give it unto him that hath the ten
pounds. 25 And they said unto him, Lord, he hath ten pounds.
26 I say unto you, that unto every one that hath shall be given;
but from him that hath not, even that which he hath shall be
taken away from him. 27 But these mine enemies, that
would not that I should reign over them, bring hither, and
slay them before me.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
28 And when he had thus spoken, he went on before, going
up to Jerusalem.
</quote>

<p>
Jesus felt impelled to deliver the parable of the Pounds
because of the mistaken belief among the crowds that
on his arrival in Jerusalem he would establish his Kingdom.
He well knew that he was to be rejected and crucified,
and that a long interval of time would elapse before his
return in triumph. In this parable he definitely predicted
this rejection and warned the unbelieving Jews of their
peril. On the other hand he encouraged his disciples to
wait with patience for his return, to watch for his coming,
and to be engaged diligently in his service, promising to
the faithful, abundant and gracious rewards.
</p>

<p>
This parable of the Pounds should be studied in connection
with the parables of the Unprofitable Servant,
ch. 17:7-10, the Laborers in the Vineyard, Matt. 20:1-16,
and the Talents, Matt. 25:14-30. The first teaches that
no reward can be claimed as a matter of merit; in view of
all that the Master has given us, even pouring out his life
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
for our redemption, we never by the most faithful service
could begin to pay the debt we owe; even the most loyal
devotion would be no ground for claiming a reward.
</p>

<p>
The parable of the Laborers in the Vineyard likewise
warns us against a mercenary spirit in which we might
serve the Master for the sake of a reward, bargaining
for so much labor for so much pay, jealous of those who
may receive as much as ourselves, though deserving, as
we believe, less.
</p>

<p>
However, while no reward may be deserved, and while
the hope of reward should not be the motive for service,
the Master has assured us that, in absolute grace and with
perfect justice, rewards will be granted to those who are
found faithful when he returns. The parable of the Talents
teaches that while opportunities and abilities for the
service of Christ may differ, those who are equally faithful
will receive equal rewards. The parable of the Pounds
tells us that when opportunities are the same, greater
faithfulness will receive greater reward.
</p>

<p>
This latter parable was delivered, as Luke tells us,
because Jesus <q>was nigh to Jerusalem, and because they
supposed that the kingdom of God was immediately to
appear.</q> Jesus therefore compared himself with a nobleman
who went into a far country, <q>to receive for himself
a kingdom, and to return.</q> Jesus was always indicating
the fact that there would be a long delay after his ascension
before he would return, and that meanwhile his followers
should be faithful to the opportunities granted them for
serving their Master. In this parable Jesus pictured these
opportunities under the figure of pounds, that is, sums of
money amounting to something like sixteen dollars each.
In comparison with a <q>talent</q> this was an insignificant
sum. Our Lord wished to suggest that to every one of
his followers something is intrusted which may be used
for the advancement of his cause.
</p>

<p>
Jesus knew that the Jews were not only to reject him
but were to continue in unbelief after his departure;
thus in the parable he stated that <q>his citizens hated him,
and sent an ambassage after him, saying, We will not that
this man reign over us.</q> The main portion of the picture,
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
however, is concerned with the return of the nobleman
and the reward of his servants. This reward was proportioned
to fidelity during the time of his absence. By
way of example, one who had so used his pound as to gain
ten pounds was made the ruler over ten cities; and one
who had gained five, was appointed over five cities. The
reward for service is thus shown to be larger service.
Faithfulness in that which is very small is a preparation
for larger responsibilities and more glorious tasks. This
is true in the present, and the principle will be the same
in the future.
</p>

<p>
One man was found, however, who had made no use
of his pound. He had kept it <q>laid up in a napkin.</q> His
excuse was that he feared his master and he said, almost
boastfully, that he had not lost what had been intrusted
to him. He was giving back that which he had been given
him. The nobleman, however, properly rebuked this
unfaithful servant in the very terms which he himself
had used. If the master was known to be so strict, the
servant should have been prepared to give a better account
of his stewardship. It is true that one cause for unfaithfulness
is an ignorance of the true nature of our Lord. Some
are really afraid to undertake Christian service because
they do not know, what the parable could not indicate,
namely, that he who intrusts us with opportunities and
abilities will give us grace, if we seek to do our best and
with a real desire to advance the interests of our Lord, try
to use the little which we have. Thus the nobleman rebuked
the unfaithful servant for not having done the least
which was possible. He could have placed the money
in the bank and then if nothing more, the master would
have received the interest on the loan. There is always
something which every servant of Christ can do for him.
There is never any real excuse for idleness and inactivity
and failure to achieve something in the cause of Christ.
</p>

<p>
The pound was taken from the unfaithful servant and
given to him who had secured the ten pounds, because
our Lord wished to illustrate the truth that with our
opportunities and privileges and gifts, the principle, use
or lose, always applies. The right employment of even
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
small gifts results in their enlargement, but failure to
appreciate and employ that which we possess results in
its ultimate loss. <q>Unto every one that hath shall be
given; but from him that hath not, even that which he
hath shall be taken away from him.</q>
</p>

<p>
The parable closes with a solemn warning to those who
reject Christ. It is not only perilous to be unfaithful in
his service but pitiful to be found in the class of those who
refuse to acknowledge him as Lord. Jesus describes in
these last words not only the destruction of Jerusalem,
but the penalty of all who share in rejecting his rule.
<q>But these mine enemies, that would not that I should
reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me.</q>
</p>

<p>
The time of his departure was at hand. The nation was
about to reject him. The nobleman was just to start
for the far country, for <q>When he had thus spoken, he
went on before, going up to Jerusalem.</q>
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>VI. The Closing Ministry. Chs. 19:29 to 21:38</head>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>A. The Triumphal Entry. Ch. 19:29-48</head>

<quote rend="display">
29 And it came to pass, when he drew nigh unto Bethphage
and Bethany, at the mount that is called Olivet, he sent two of
the disciples, 30 saying, Go your way into the village over
against <hi rend='italic'>you</hi>; in which as ye enter ye shall find a colt tied,
whereon no man ever yet sat: loose him, and bring him. 31
And if anyone ask you, Why do ye loose him? thus shall ye
say, The Lord hath need of him. 32 And they that were sent
went away, and found even as he had said unto them. 33 And
as they were loosing the colt, the owners thereof said unto
them, Why loose ye the colt? 34 And they said, The Lord hath
need of him. 35 And they brought him to Jesus: and they
threw their garments upon the colt, and set Jesus thereon.
36 And as he went, they spread their garments in the way.
37 And as he was now drawing nigh, <hi rend='italic'>even</hi> at the descent of the
mount of Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began
to rejoice and praise God with a loud voice for all the mighty
works which they had seen; 38 saying, Blessed <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> the King
that cometh in the name of the Lord: peace in heaven, and
glory in the highest. 39 And some of the Pharisees from the
multitude said unto him, Teacher, rebuke thy disciples. 40
And he answered and said, I tell you that, if these shall hold
their peace, the stones will cry out.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
41 And when he drew nigh, he saw the city and wept over
it, 42 saying, If thou hadst known in this day, even thou, the
things which belong unto peace! but now they are hid from
thine eyes. 43 For the days shall come upon thee, when thine
enemies shall cast up a bank about thee, and compass thee
round, and keep thee in on every side, 44 and shall dash thee
to the ground, and thy children within thee; and they shall
not leave in thee one stone upon another; because thou knewest
not the time of thy visitation.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
45 And he entered into the temple, and began to cast out
them that sold, 46 saying unto them, It is written, And my
house shall be a house of prayer: but ye have made it a den
of robbers.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
47 And he was teaching daily in the temple. But the chief
priests and the scribes and the principal men of the people
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
sought to destroy him: 48 and they could not find what they
might do; for the people all hung upon him, listening.
</quote>

<p>
The story of Luke is never lacking in human interest,
but no scene is more suffused with sentiment, none
more vivid with color, than that which pictures Jesus
entering Jerusalem in triumph. We see our Lord mounted
as a king, surrounded by acclaiming multitudes, sweeping
over the brow of Olivet, while his attendant disciples
spread their garments in the way and hail him as the
Messiah. We see him lamenting over the doomed city
and hear the harsh tones of the rulers who are plotting
his death. With all these shouts of joy and sobs of grief
and mutterings of malice, surely no scene is so full of
emotion and none can illustrate more strikingly the relation
between religious feeling and religious faith.
</p>

<p>
An appeal to the eye and ear and heart may awaken
sentiment and prepare the way for the surrender of the
will. There is to-day a proper place for music and architecture
and eloquence as aids to devotion. In the case
of the triumphal entry, Jesus planned every detail. He
sent two disciples to secure the colt on which he was to
ride; he allowed the disciples to place on the colt their
garments, and as he rode toward the city he accepted the
acclamations of the crowd. When the Pharisees criticized
Jesus for permitting such praise and arousing such
excitement, he declared that such homage to himself
was not only proper but necessary, and that if the multitudes
were silenced the very stones would <q>cry out</q> to
welcome and to honor him. Jesus was offering himself as
King for the last time, and therefore his offer was to be
made in the most impressive way. He appealed to the
imagination. He stirred the emotions. He did not mean
that he was to be such a king as the people supposed;
the borrowed colt, the garments of peasants, the banners
of leafy branches were not to be the permanent furnishings
of a court. He wished to secure the submission of their
wills, the complete surrender of their lives, and therefore
he made this stirring, dramatic, emotional appeal to the
multitudes. He knew that religious feeling is an aid to
religious faith.
</p>

<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>

<p>
However, religious feeling is not to be confused with
religious faith. Emotion is no substitute for conviction.
Jesus was not deceived. As he caught sight of the sacred
city and heard the bitter criticism of the Pharisees, he
realized the stubborn unbelief he was to encounter; he
saw his rejection and death and the consequent destruction
of Jerusalem and he pronounced his pathetic lament,
<q>If thou hadst known in this day, even thou, the things
which belong unto peace!</q> He predicted the ghastly
horrors of the coming siege and the desolation of Zion
and declared that it was due to inability to see that he
had come as a Saviour and that his ministry had been a
gracious visitation which might have resulted in repentance
and in continued life for the nation. It is the sad,
sad lament for what might have been.
</p>

<p>
Jesus entered the Temple and rebuked the rulers for
allowing the house of God to be desecrated by degrading
traffic. As the story closes we see Jesus standing in the
center of the scene, on one hand the rulers plotting against
his life, and on his other the multitudes hanging admiringly
upon his words. Only too soon the rulers were to persuade
the crowds to cry out for his crucifixion, and we are reminded
that religious feeling unaccompanied by conviction
may soon be chilled into indifference and hate.
</p>

<p>
There were those, however, like the disciples, who never
forgot this scene of triumph. Its fuller meaning was
appreciated in later years and as their trust in Christ
strengthened, they looked back with ever deeper emotions
upon the experiences of that memorable day; for it
is true that religious feeling is after all a natural and inevitable
consequence of religious faith.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>B. The Question As To Authority. Ch. 20:1-8</head>

<quote rend="display">
1 And it came to pass, on one of the days, as he was teaching
the people in the temple, and preaching the gospel, there
came upon him the chief priests and the scribes with the elders;
2 and they spake, saying unto him, Tell us: By what
authority doest thou these things? or who is he that gave thee
this authority? 3 And he answered and said unto them I also
will ask you a question; and tell me: 4 The baptism of John,
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
was it from heaven, or from men? 5 And they reasoned with
themselves, saying, if we shall say, From heaven; he will say,
Why did ye not believe him? 6 But if we shall say, From men;
all the people will stone us: for they are persuaded that John
was a prophet. 7 And they answered, that they knew not
whence <hi rend='italic'>it was</hi>. 8 And Jesus said unto them, Neither tell I
you by what authority I do these things.
</quote>

<p>
After his triumphal entry into the city, Jesus continued
to be the popular idol of the multitudes that thronged
Jerusalem at the passover season. It was this popularity
which delayed the designs of the rulers, as they had
determined to put Jesus to death. They must first discredit
him with the people. With this in view they sent
a deputation from their chief court, the sanhedrin, to
entrap Jesus in his talk or to bring him into conflict with
the Jewish or Roman rulers. They challenged him to
state by what authority he was receiving such honors as
the Messiah, or driving the traders from the Temple, or
performing his miracles. Their question was framed with
subtle skill, <q>By what authority doest thou these things?
or who is he that gave thee this authority?</q> They placed
Jesus in a dilemma; if he should claim that authority had
been delegated to him, then he might be accused of disloyalty
and of schism, in supplanting the recognized
<q>authorities</q> of the Jewish state; if he should claim inherent
divine authority, as identified with God, he
might be condemned for blasphemy.
</p>

<p>
Jesus silenced his enemies with a question which involved
them in a counter dilemma: <q>The baptism of John, was
it from heaven, or from men?</q> They could not say
<q>from heaven,</q> for they had rejected John; they dared
not say <q>from men,</q> for they feared the people by whom
John was regarded as a prophet. So they tried to escape
by cowardly replying that they did not know. Agnosticism
is usually cowardly and deserving of little respect.
</p>

<p>
But Jesus did more than silence them; he answered
them. His question was no irrelevant riddle by which
he met a difficulty and delayed the necessity of a reply.
He definitely implied that the authority of John was divine
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
and that his own authority was the same; but as they
were afraid to deny the divine authority of John they
were also powerless to deny that of Jesus; and further
he implied that if they had accepted the message of
John, they would be prepared to accept Jesus. It is true
that if we are afraid to accept the logical conclusions of
our doubts and denials, we never can hope to discover
truth.
</p>

<p>
Jesus further rebuked and exposed his enemies. When
they said that they did not know, Jesus knew, and they
knew, and the crowds knew, that they were not honest;
the Lord had laid bare their hypocrisy; he had made it
perfectly evident that the real question at issue was not
authority but obedience. The enemies of Jesus pretended
that they wanted to know more of his credentials; they
really wanted to discredit and entrap him. The modern
enemies of our Lord declare that they want more proofs,
more evidence; what they really lack is love for God and
submission to his will. Those who do not repent when
John preaches, will not believe when Jesus offers to save.
The world needs to-day, not more proof of divine authority,
but more obedience to the divine will.
</p>

<p>
Jesus absolutely discredited his enemies in the sight of
the people. They were the constituted authorities in all
matters civil and religious, and yet they were made to
confess publicly that they were not competent to judge
a clear, familiar, important case relating to religious
authority. They really abdicated their position. They,
therefore, were disqualified to pass an opinion on the
exactly parallel case of the authority of Jesus. Jesus had
defeated them with their own weapon. No wonder that
subsequently, when on trial before such judges, he refused
to answer them a word. He had shown their incompetence,
their insincerity, their unbelief. Honest doubters are deserving
of sympathy; but professed seekers after truth, who
are unwilling to accept the consequences of belief, should
expect to receive no further light. An increasing knowledge
of divine realities is conditioned upon humble submission
of the heart and the will to what already has
been revealed.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>C. The Parable Of The Husbandmen. Ch. 20:9-18</head>

<quote rend="display">
9 And he began to speak unto the people this parable: A
man planted a vineyard, and let it out to husbandmen, and
went into another country for a long time. 10 And at the season
he sent unto the husbandmen a servant, that they should
give him of the fruit of the vineyard: but the husbandmen beat
him, and sent him away empty. 11 And he sent yet another
servant: and him also they beat, and handled him shamefully,
and sent him away empty. 12 And he sent yet a third: and
him also they wounded, and cast him forth. 13 And the lord
of the vineyard said, What shall I do? I will send my beloved
son; it may be they will reverence him. 14 But when the
husbandmen saw him, they reasoned with one another, saying,
This is the heir; let us kill him, that the inheritance may be
ours. 15 And they cast him forth out of the vineyard, and
killed him. What therefore will the lord of the vineyard do
unto them? 16 He will come and destroy these husbandmen,
and will give the vineyard unto others. And when they heard
it, they said, God forbid. 17 But he looked upon them, and
said, What then is this that is written,
<lg>
<l>The stone which the builders rejected,</l>
<l>The same was made the head of the corner?</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
18 Every one that falleth on that stone shall be broken to
pieces; but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will scatter him as
dust.
</quote>

<p>
To the malicious challenge of his enemies Jesus had
already replied, claiming for himself divine authority and
condemning the rulers for their guilty unbelief. He now
added a parable, more clearly stating his claims and more
solemnly rebuking these hostile rulers and pronouncing
judgment upon the nation they represented. He told the
story of a householder who established and equipped a
vineyard and let it out to tenants. He lived at a distance
and expected as rent a certain portion of the vintage.
When he sent for the fruit, however, his messengers were
abused and killed; at last his own son was sent and was
slain. He determined to come and to exact justice and
to deliver his vineyard to tenants who were more worthy.
</p>

<p>
The parable was so plain that the enemies of Jesus
perfectly understood its meaning. The householder
was his Father; the vineyard was Israel; the husbandmen
were the rulers to whom the nation had been intrusted;
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
the servants were the prophets sent to summon the people
to repent and to render to God the fruits of righteousness;
the son was Jesus himself, who thus claimed a unique
relation to God, distinct from the prophets and from all
human messengers; the death of the heir was his own
approaching crucifixion; the return of the householder was
the coming visitation of divine judgment, the rejection of
Israel, and the call of the Gentiles. It was aside from
the present purpose of Jesus to refer to the individual
Jews who would accept him and to the future conversion
of the nation of which Paul wrote. He wished now to
emphasize his own rejection and the guilt and punishment
of the nation. He declared, however, that this death
would issue in his exaltation and triumph; that he was <q>the
stone which the builders rejected,</q> which <q>was made the
head of the corner.</q> He also warned his enemies that all
who, in unbelief, should stumble on that stone, all who
should reject him, would be <q>broken to pieces,</q> and all
who should attempt to drag down that stone would be
ground and scattered as dust.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>D. The Question As To Paying Tribute. Ch. 20:19-26</head>

<quote rend="display">
19 And the scribes and the chief priests sought to lay hands
on him in that very hour; and they feared the people: for they
perceived that he spake this parable against them. 20 And
they watched him, and sent forth spies, who feigned themselves
to be righteous, that they might take hold of his speech,
so as to deliver him up to the rule and to the authority of the
governor. 21 And they asked him, saying, Teacher, we know
that thou sayest and teachest rightly, and acceptest not the
person <hi rend='italic'>of any</hi>, but of a truth teachest the way of God: 22 Is
it lawful for us to give tribute unto Cæsar, or not? 23 But
he perceived their craftiness, and said unto them, 24 Show
me a denarius. Whose image and superscription hath it?
And they said, Cæsar's. 25 And he said unto them, Then
render unto Cæsar the things that are Cæsar's, and unto
God the things that are God's. 26 And they were not able
to take hold of the saying before the people: and they marvelled
at his answer, and held their peace.
</quote>

<p>
The rulers had been defeated, discredited, and disgraced
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
but they had not been discouraged. In their first question
they failed utterly to bring Jesus into any unlawful opposition
to the religious courts. They now attempted
by a new question to draw from him an answer which
either would make him unpopular with the people or
would bring him under the condemnation of the civil
ruler. They asked him a question relative to the payment
of tribute to the Roman Government. The more conservative
Jews held that God was the ruler of Israel and that
possibly it was wrong to pay taxes to support a heathen
state. The more liberal party sided with the Herods,
who owed their power to Rome. Therefore the enemies of
Jesus sent to him representatives of both parties, Pharisees
and Herodians, so that if he should avoid offending
one party he would displease the other. They approached
Jesus with the flattering assurance that he was so truthful
and courageous that he would not hesitate to express his
true convictions; and then they proposed their artful
question: <q>Is it lawful for us to give tribute unto Cæsar,
or not?</q> Should Jesus say, <q>Yes</q>? Then he would
cease to be a popular idol, for the people loathed the hateful
oppression of Rome. Should Jesus say, <q>No</q>? Then his
enemies would hurry him away to the Roman governor
and the cross, as a traitor and a rebel. The dilemma
seemed complete; yet Jesus not only escaped the snare,
but, in his reply, he enunciated a law for all time. <q>Render
unto Cæsar the things that are Cæsar's, and unto God
the things that are God's.</q>
</p>

<p>
To make plain his meaning, Jesus first called for a Roman
coin, and asked whose image and superscription it bore.
The reply, of course, was <q>Cæsar's.</q> Jesus therefore
declared that those who accept the protection of a government
and the privileges provided by a government, are
under obligation to support that government. Christianity
never should be identified with any political party or
social theory; but Christians ever should take their stand
for loyalty, for order, and for law.
</p>

<p>
It is not the whole of life, however, to <q>render unto
Cæsar the things that are Cæsar's;</q> one must also render
<q>unto God the things that are God's.</q> The latter higher
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
allegiance includes the former. The enemies of Jesus
suggested a conflict of duties; he showed that there was
perfect harmony. He intimated, however, that there was
danger of forgetting God, and our obligations to him of
trust, service, worship, love. The true basis for citizenship
is devotion to God, and no political theory or party
allegiance can be taken as a substitute for loyalty to him.
The enemies of Jesus were answered and rebuked, and
his followers were given guidance for all the coming years.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>E. The Question As To The Resurrection. Ch. 20:27-40</head>

<quote rend="display">
27 And there came to him certain of the Sadducees, they
that say that there is no resurrection; 28 and they asked him
saying, Teacher, Moses wrote unto us, that if a man's brother
die, having a wife, and he be childless, his brother should
take the wife, and raise up seed unto his brother. 29 There
were therefore seven brethren: and the first took a wife, and
died childless; 30 and the second; 31 and the third took her;
and likewise the seven also left no children, and died. 32 Afterward
the woman also died. 33 In the resurrection therefore
whose wife of them shall she be? for the seven had her
to wife. 34 And Jesus said unto them, The sons of this world
marry, and are given in marriage: 35 but they that are accounted
worthy to attain to that world, and the resurrection
from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage:
36 for neither can they die any more: for they are equal unto
the angels; and are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection.
37 But that the dead are raised, even Moses showed, <hi rend='italic'>in the
place concerning</hi> the Bush, when he calleth the Lord the
God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.
38 Now he is not the God of the dead, but of the living: for all
live unto him. 39 And certain of the scribes answering said,
Teacher, thou hast well said. 40 For they durst not any
more ask him any question.
</quote>

<p>
Jesus had foiled the scribes and the chief priests in their
plan to entrap him in his public teaching. He was now
attacked by the Sadducees who were the priestly and most
powerful party among the Jews. They denied the immortality
of the soul and believed neither in angels nor in
spirits; they represented the modern materialists. It is to
be noted that the question with which they approached
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
Jesus was not one which referred only to immortality
but specifically to the resurrection of the body. They
proposed the case of a woman married successively to
seven brothers from each of whom she was separated by
death; and they asked, <q>In the resurrection therefore
whose wife of them shall she be? for the seven had her to
wife.</q> They hoped that Jesus would either deny the
orthodox belief as to the resurrection or would make some
statement which would contradict the Law of Moses in
accordance with which the successive marriages were made.
They implied that this accepted Law was inconsistent
with the belief in a resurrection.
</p>

<p>
In his reply Jesus declared that in the resurrection life
will be regulated by larger laws than are known in this
present age. Those who will share the glory of that age,
and who will experience the blessedness of <q>the resurrection
from the dead</q> will be immortal in soul and body. Marriage,
which is now necessary for a continuance of the race,
will no longer exist. The relationships in that life will be
higher than even the most sacred relationship of the present
life. Those who have a part in this resurrection will be
<q>equal unto the angels,</q> not in all particulars, but in the
fact that their state will be deathless. In that larger
sense they will be <q>sons of God</q> and <q>sons of the resurrection,</q>
for death will have lost its power over them.
</p>

<p>
Such a reply should be carefully weighed by men of the
present day who deny miracles and refuse to believe in
resurrection and immortality. Many beliefs which are
now ridiculed because they seem to contradict established
laws of science will some day be vindicated by the discovery
of higher and more inclusive laws than are now
known.
</p>

<p>
In his answer Jesus already had rebuked the Sadducees
for denying the existence of angels. He next established
the fact of the resurrection by a quotation from the very
Law on which they had depended to show that resurrection
was impossible. He recalled the words recorded by Moses
in reference to <q>the God of Abraham, and the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob.</q> He then added, <q>He is not
the God of the dead, but of the living.</q> Jesus meant to
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
establish the fact of the continued existence of the dead;
yet not merely this, but to prove the resurrection of the
dead. The latter was the question at issue. The word
<q>living,</q> as used by our Lord, indicates those who are
enjoying a normal life, not that of disembodied spirits,
but of immortal spirits clothed with deathless bodies.
Therefore Jesus added, <q>for all live unto him.</q> In the
mind and purpose of God all are to be raised from the
dead and to enjoy that complete and blessed existence
which resurrection implies. The confident expectation
of such a future state is based on our relation to God. If
he is truly our God and we are his people, the triumph of
death is not real and permanent but will be ended by the
glorious immortality of the body and of the soul.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>F. The Question Of Jesus. Ch. 20:41-44</head>

<quote rend="display">
41 And he said unto them, How say they that the Christ is
David's son? 42 For David himself saith in the book of
Psalms,
<lg>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">The Lord said unto my Lord,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Sit thou on my right hand,</l>
<l>43 Till I make thine enemies the footstool of thy feet.</l>
</lg>
David therefore calleth him Lord, and how is he his son?
</quote>

<p>
Jesus had defeated his enemies in debate. They had
come to him with a series of crafty questions designed to
discredit him as a public teacher and to secure some ground
for his arrest. To each of these questions he had given a
reply by which his foes had been unmasked and condemned.
He then asked them a question. It was intended not
only forever to silence his foes, though it accomplished
this, for henceforth no man ventured to meet him in
public discussion; nor yet did Jesus desire further to
humiliate his enemies. In the presence of the people he
had already shown them to be ridiculous, contemptible,
impotent, and insincere. His real motive was to ask a
question, the answer to which would embody the chief of
all his claims, namely, the claim that he is divine. It
was of supreme importance that this claim should be made
at exactly this time. He knew that the rulers had been
unable to find a charge on which to arraign him before
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
either the ecclesiastical or the civil court. He realized
that they would dare to make no other attempt in public,
but he clearly foresaw the fact that, through the treachery
of Judas, he would be arrested and, before both these
courts, would be arraigned on the charge of blasphemy.
His enemies would accuse him of claiming to be not only
the Messiah but also divine. On this occasion, therefore,
in the presence both of the rulers and the people, he made
the defense which never can be broken or forgotten as
he definitely demonstrated from Scripture that the
Messiah was described by the inspired writers as a divine
Being. All that Jesus claimed for himself, as recorded in
the Gospel of John, was included in the answer which was
implied by the question which he now asked. Even for the
present day it involves the supreme problem in the sphere
of philosophy and religion. This problem concerns the
person of Christ. Is he to be regarded as Man or God,
or at once God and Man? Where is he to be placed in the
scale of being; or, as Jesus voiced the problem, how
could David speak of the coming Messiah as both his
son and his Lord? There was but one answer. There
can be but one. The Messiah was to be divine. The
son of David is also the Son of God. The incarnation
is the only solution of our most serious difficulties in the
realm of religious belief. By his question Jesus not only
silenced his enemies; he also showed their insincerity
in condemning him to death and their rejection of the
inspired Scriptures in their unwillingness to believe the
testimony concerning the person of the Messiah. Jesus
unquestionably claimed to be the divine Saviour of the
world. The ideal Man is also the incarnate God.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>G. The Warning Against The Scribes. Ch. 20:45-47</head>

<quote rend="display">
45 And in the hearing of all the people he said unto his
disciples, 46 Beware of the scribes, who desire to walk in
long robes, and love salutations in the marketplaces, and
chief seats in the synagogues, and chief places at feasts;
47 who devour widows' houses, and for a pretence make long
prayers: these shall receive greater condemnation.
</quote>

<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>

<p>
As the long day of public controversy drew to its close,
it was not strange that Jesus turned to warn the people
against these enemies who had been seeking to defeat him
and who were determined upon his death. These professed
guides could not be followed safely. These rulers had shown
themselves to be unworthy of their place and power. The
people must look elsewhere for true teachers. They
must find other men to interpret for them the will of God.
</p>

<p>
The scribes were the professional teachers of the day,
the trained expositors of the Law. Most of them were
Pharisees. They were of all men the most bitter enemies
of Christ; they were jealous of his power; they were
angered at his claims; and finally they had been goaded
to desperation by their humiliating defeat at his hands.
Upon these men Jesus pronounced the most stern condemnation.
His words are recorded at length by Matthew.
In the brief summary of the discourse made by Mark
and by Luke we find only a few short sentences which
sketch three principal features in the character of these
unworthy leaders of religious thought. The first is their
vanity, their ambition for display and for high position,
and their love of flattery. The second is their cruel
avarice, expressed by our Lord in the suggestive clause,
<q>who devour widows' houses.</q> The third was their
shameful hypocrisy; they are described as men who <q>for a
pretence make long prayers.</q> It has always been remarked
that the most bitter denunciations of Jesus were
addressed to the men whose outward lives were most
respectable and whose religious professions were most
loud. This does not mean, however, that open vice and
flagrant sin are better than selfish and proud morality;
but it does remind us that great religious privileges and
the possession of revealed truth involve solemn responsibilities
and that hypocrisy and pretense are abominations
in the sight of God.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>H. The Widow's Mites. Ch. 21:1-4</head>

<quote rend="display">
1 And he looked up, and saw the rich men that were casting
their gifts into the treasury. 2 And he saw a certain poor
widow casting in thither two mites. 3 And he said, Of a
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
truth I say unto you, This poor widow cast in more than they
all: 4 for all these did of their superfluity cast in unto the
gifts; but she of her want did cast in all the living that she had.
</quote>

<p>
What a contrast this charming sketch supplies to the
picture which Jesus drew of the Pharisees! In the eyes of
the world the service of the poor widow was meager and
worthless, while the gifts of the hypocrites were costly and
great; in the eyes of the Lord their offerings were comparatively
worthless and she gave more than they all. As a
matter of fact, she had brought but two small coins, worth
less than a half cent, but they were all that she had.
With this scene in mind we should be careful not to call
our offerings <q>mites</q> unless they are all that we possess;
we should be encouraged, however, to know that our Lord
looks upon the heart and estimates the gift by the motive
and the love and the sacrifice involved; above all, we
should be reminded that we can best measure our offerings
not by what we give but by how much we keep.
The influence of the woman is still moving multitudes
toward the treasury of the Lord.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>I. The Destruction Of Jerusalem And The Coming Of Christ.
Ch. 21:5-38</head>

<p>
During the days of his ministry Jesus frequently predicted
his death and also his return to glory. He saw clearly
before him a cross but on the distant horizon a throne.
Again and again he had warned the Jews that their
rejection of him and of his call to repentance would
result in the destruction of Jerusalem and in the anguish
of their race, and quite as frequently he had told his
disciples that while indeed he was to die and rise again,
a long period of time would pass before he would return
in glory to establish his Kingdom. The great, final
discourse relating to the future was delivered at the close
of his last day of public controversy and teaching. As
Jesus sat with his disciples on the slope of the Mount of
Olives, as he looked westward and saw the sun sinking
behind the majestic buildings of the sacred city, he realized
that in truth the night was gathering over the nation, that
his own day of earthly ministry was done, and that the
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
true dawning would not break for the world until the
Son of righteousness should arise in true glory, until he
himself would return to fill the earth with the peace and
joy and splendor of his universal reign. He, therefore,
told his disciples with much detail the story of the
approaching destruction of Jerusalem and of his own
return after the long years of faithful service and of eager
waiting which were appointed for his followers.
</p>

<p>
This prophetic discourse of Jesus is difficult to interpret;
first of all, because it is phrased in figurative terms, the
exact meaning of which is not always apparent. Again it
appears that we have only a partial report of the prophecies
then spoken by our Lord; it is necessary to compare
the records of Matthew and Mark with the statements
here given by Luke, and then to remember that we have
probably only a fraction of the whole discourse. In the
third place, it is evident that our Lord was describing
not one event, but two. He was prophesying the literal
overthrow of the holy city by the armies of Rome, but
he was using the colors of this tragic scene to paint the
picture of his own return in glory. So interwoven are
these two series of predictions that it is not always evident
whether the reference is to the nearer or to the more
remote of these events. While we may note with some
definiteness the general outline of the prophecy and while
there need be little doubt as to its two outstanding features,
namely, the destruction of the city and the return of our
Lord, the study of this chapter should be undertaken
with humility, and our conclusions should be stated with
caution and with reserve. The result need not be bewilderment
or despair; it should be encouragement and
more confident expectation of the coming of Christ and
the ultimate triumph of his cause.
</p>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>1. The Present Age. Ch. 21:5-19</head>

<quote rend="display">
5 And as some spake of the temple, how it was adorned
with goodly stones and offerings, he said, 6 As for these
things which ye behold, the days will come, in which there
shall not be left here one stone upon another, that shall not
be thrown down. 7 And they asked him, saying, Teacher,
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
when therefore shall these things be? and what <hi rend='italic'>shall</hi> be the
sign when these things are about to come to pass? 8 And he
said, Take heed that ye be not led astray: for many shall come
in my name, saying, I am <hi rend='italic'>he</hi>; and, The time is at hand: go
ye not after them. 9 And when ye shall hear of wars and
tumults, be not terrified: for these things must needs come
to pass first; but the end is not immediately.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
10 Then said he unto them, Nation shall rise against nation,
and kingdom against kingdom; 11 and there shall be great
earthquakes, and in divers places famines and pestilences;
and there shall be terrors and great signs from heaven. 12
But before all these things, they shall lay their hands on you,
and shall persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues
and prisons, bringing you before kings and governors for
my name's sake. 13 It shall turn out unto you for a testimony.
Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate beforehand
how to answer: 15 for I will give you a mouth and
wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to withstand
or to gainsay. 16 But ye shall be delivered up even by
parents, and brethren, and kinsfolk, and friends; and <hi rend='italic'>some</hi>
of you shall they cause to be put to death. 17 And ye shall
be hated of all men for my name's sake. 18 And not a
hair of your head shall perish. 19 In your patience ye shall
win your souls.
</quote>

<p>
The occasion of this prophetic message was the question
asked by the disciples, as they gazed on the splendor of the
Temple, concerning the destruction of which Jesus had
spoken as he declared that the days would come <q>in
which there shall not be left here one stone upon another,
that shall not be thrown down. And they asked him,
saying, Teacher, when therefore shall these things be?
and what shall be the sign when these things are about to
come to pass?</q> In the words of Matthew, they also
asked, <q>What shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the
end of the world?</q>
</p>

<p>
First of all, then, Jesus sketched for his disciples the
character of this present age down to its very end, and
described the experiences of his followers urging them to
be faithful to him amidst all the commotions and trials
of the coming years until he should return. According
to his description the age will be characterized by the
appearance of many deceivers who will claim the
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
allegiance of his followers and assume to take the place
of Christ. Furthermore, there will be wars and tumults
but by these believers are not to be terrified. It is always
a temptation of shallow minds to interpret every unusual
event as a sign of the approaching end of the world. Our
Lord assured his disciples that all through the passing
years such events would happen without warranting the
conclusion that the great event is near; as he declared,
<q>The end is not immediately;</q> there would be a long
period of delay; there would be a political commotion,
<q>Nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against
kingdom.</q> There would also be earthquakes, famines,
pestilences, and <q>great signs from heaven,</q> but these
again must be regarded as characteristics of the present
age and not as signs of its approaching end.
</p>

<p>
Furthermore, the followers of Christ must suffer bitter
persecution and be brought before kings and governors for
his name's sake. They must continue steadfast in their
testimony. They need not be troubled as to the exact form
of their witness but must trust the unseen Master to give
them all needed wisdom as they speak boldly in his name.
</p>

<p>
Most distressing of all, they must suffer from the treachery
of <q>parents and brethren, and kinsfolk, and friends</q>
and some of them must taste the bitter cup of martyrdom;
they will be hated of all men, yet their souls will not
perish. By their steadfast endurance they will win
eternal salvation. It is true, the picture is one of great
hardship and distress but its message has encouraged
sufferers who in all ages have been faithful in their testimony
and have found the comfort and inspiration which
is possible for all as they look for the coming and Kingdom
of Christ.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>2. The Destruction of Jerusalem. Ch. 21:20-24</head>

<quote rend="display">
20 But when ye see Jerusalem compassed with armies,
then know that her desolation is at hand. 21 Then let them
that are in Judæa flee unto the mountains; and let them that
are in the midst of her depart out; and let not them that
are in the country enter therein. 22 For these are days of
vengeance, that all things are written may be fulfilled. 23
Woe unto them that are with child and them that give suck
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
in those days! for there shall be great distress upon the land,
and wrath unto this people. 24 And they shall fall by the edge
of the sword, and shall be led captive into all the nations:
and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until
the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.
</quote>

<p>
As our Lord scanned the future he now fixed his eyes
first of all upon that dreadful event which in some of its
features foreshadowed the end of that age which he had
been describing. On more than one occasion he had
predicted the destruction of Jerusalem. He now declared
that the definite sign of the descending doom would be the
siege of the city: <q>When ye see Jerusalem compassed with
armies, then know that her desolation is at hand.</q> He
warned those within the city to flee to the mountains and
declared that those who were in the country should not
turn to the city for safety, because the days of vengeance
will have come and the prophecies of punishment upon
the guilty nation will be about to be fulfilled. It would
be a time of unparalleled distress and horror; as Jesus declared,
<q>They shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall
be led captive into all the nations.</q> How literally his
words were fulfilled is a familiar fact of history. It would
be difficult to recall another scene of equally hideous carnage.
It is estimated that a million Jews fell victims
to the slaughter and outrage of the soldiers under Titus,
and that unnumbered thousands were led as captives to
Egypt and other lands.
</p>

<p>
Last of all Jesus predicted that Jerusalem would be
<q>trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the
Gentiles be fulfilled.</q> The first phrase denotes something
more than mere domination and Gentile control; it indicates
something of indignity and disgrace and humiliation
and this state of the holy city is to continue until <q>the
times of the Gentiles</q> are fulfilled, which probably means
during all the ages of Gentile control, and further, during
all the seasons of grace in which the gospel is being preached
to the Gentile world, indeed, until the return of our Lord.
<q>Gentiles</q> are plainly contrasted with Jews, and not
with Christians. The mere fact that the sacred city has
passed into control of Christian powers is no proof that the
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
age is near its end; for this end there will be definite signs
as Jesus himself proceeded to declare. However, as one
turns from this lurid picture of the destruction of the
historic city, and remembers how exactly these prophecies
came to pass, it should be with a new confidence in the
further predictions made by Christ and with a new belief
that the more significant events of which he next proceeded
to speak will be fulfilled likewise with exactness and
in all their promised glory.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>3. The Coming of Christ. Ch. 21:25-28</head>

<quote rend="display">
25 And there shall be signs in the sun and moon and stars;
and upon the earth distress of nations, in perplexity for the
roaring of the sea and the billows; 26 men fainting for fear,
and for expectation of the things which are coming on the
world: for the powers of the heavens shall be shaken. 27
And then shall they see the Son of man coming in a cloud
with power and great glory. 28 But when these things begin
to come to pass, look up, and lift up your heads; because
your redemption draweth nigh.
</quote>

<p>
Immediately before the return of our Lord, as the age
draws to its close, there are to be certain signs so definite,
so startling, and so terrifying, that they will leave no doubt
that the predicted event is immediately to follow. They
are described, however, in terms which may be largely
figurative: <q>signs in the sun and moon and stars; and upon
the earth distress of nations, in perplexity for the roaring
of the sea and the billows; men fainting for fear ... for the
powers of the heavens shall be shaken;</q> then will occur
the event toward which all the ages are moving, for which
the weary world has waited and by which the work of the
Church will be crowned and her hopes fulfilled, namely,
the personal, glorious appearing of the crucified, risen,
ascended Lord. It may be a time of distress for the
impenitent but for believers it will be a time of hope
and expectation. When the signs of which Jesus spoke
<q>begin to come to pass,</q> then, according to the words of
Jesus, his followers may hopefully lift up their heads to
greet their Deliverer, for their redemption will be at
hand. The coming of Christ will be an event unexpected
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
by the world, but Christians will be so definitely warned
that they can be looking for the promised deliverance and
for the predicted glory.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>4. The Encouragement to Hope and Vigilance. Ch. 21:29-36</head>

<quote rend="display">
29 And he spake to them a parable: Behold the fig tree, and
all the trees: 30 when they now shoot forth, ye see it and know
of your own selves that the summer is now nigh. 31 Even
so ye also, when ye see these things coming to pass, know ye
that the kingdom of God is nigh. 32 Verily I say unto you,
This generation shall not pass away, till all things be accomplished.
33 Heaven and earth, shall pass away: but my
words shall not pass away.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
34 But take heed to yourselves, lest haply your hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of
this life, and that day come on you suddenly as a snare:
35 for <hi rend='italic'>so</hi> shall it come upon all them that dwell on the face
of all the earth. 36 But watch ye at every season, making
supplication, that ye may prevail to escape all these things
that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man.
</quote>

<p>
In speaking of his return in glory, Jesus mentioned certain
definite signs by which his followers will know that his
coming is near. To explain more clearly the purpose of
these <q>signs,</q> Jesus spoke a brief parable in which he compared
their appearance to the foliage put forth in the
springtime which becomes a certain harbinger of the summer.
Many have supposed that Jesus indicated Israel by
his reference to <q>the fig tree</q> and have concluded that a
revival of Judaism and a return of the Jews to Palestine
will be a certain indication that the present age is drawing
to its close. Whatever may be predicted elsewhere concerning
the Jews, there is no such reference here, for Jesus
not only said, <q>Behold the fig tree,</q> but also, <q>all the
trees.</q> His meaning is perfectly plain. He did not refer
to nations under the figure of trees, but he declared that as
the foliage is a sure precursor of summer, so the signs of
which he spoke are a certain indication of his imminent return.
<q>Even so ye also, when ye see these things coming to
pass, know ye that the kingdom of God is nigh,</q> the Kingdom
which is to be established in glory at the appearing of
our Lord.
</p>

<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>

<p>
Jesus further awakened the expectation of his hearers by
the statement, <q>This generation shall not pass away, till
all things be accomplished.</q> It is improbable, as again
many have supposed, that Jesus referred to the Hebrew
race by the term <q>this generation.</q> The words are almost
certainly to be interpreted in their usual significance and
<q>all things</q> to be <q>accomplished</q> refers to the destruction
of Jerusalem regarded as the type and symbol of the return
of Christ. These two events are thus closely related in this
prophetic discourse and the literal fulfillment of the first
gives to believers a more confident assurance of the certain
occurrence of the latter: <q>Heaven and earth shall pass
away: but my words shall not pass away.</q> The hope that
our Lord will come is not based on human conjectures, but
on his own unfailing predictions. All that is material and
temporal may cease to exist, but his promises are eternal.
</p>

<p>
In view of such glorious prophecies the heart of the
Christian is ever to be set upon the gracious realities relating
to the coming of the Master. The followers of
Christ must be on their guard lest they be overcome by the
influences which Jesus described as characterizing the days
immediately preceding his return. There will be temptation
to self-indulgence and indifference and absorption in
worldly cares. Believers are warned to be on their watch
lest the coming of Christ overtake them unexpectedly, as
indeed it will come upon others. They are urged to watch
and to pray that they may be able to escape from those
judgments which will break upon a guilty world, and may
be counted worthy to take their places in the glorious Kingdom
of their Lord.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>5. The Historic Statement. Ch. 21:37, 38</head>

<quote rend="display">
37 And every day he was teaching in the temple; and every
night he went out, and lodged in the mount that was called
Olivet. 38 And all the people came early in the morning to
him in the temple, to hear him.
</quote>

<p>
Luke closes his account of the discourse delivered by
Jesus in reference to his return by a statement which summarizes
the general conditions which marked the final
events of Jesus' earthly ministry. He states that Jesus
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
passed his days teaching in the Temple and spent the
nights under the open skies on the slopes of the Mount of
Olives, and that the people were so eager to hear him that
they resorted to the Temple early each morning. This
statement is rather in the nature of a review. It marks a
transition in the narrative. In reality, Jesus seems to have
returned to the city only once more, when he was arrested
and led forth to die. Luke prepares us for these last events.
The story has reached its climax.
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>VII. The Death and Resurrection. Chs. 22 to 24</head>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>A. The Treachery Of Judas. Ch. 22:1-6</head>

<quote rend="display">
1 Now the feast of unleavened bread drew nigh, which is
called the Passover. 2 And the chief priests and the scribes
sought how they might put him to death; for they feared the
people.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
3 And Satan entered into Judas who was called Iscariot,
being of the number of the twelve. 4 And he went away,
and communed with the chief priests and captains, how he
might deliver him unto them. 5 And they were glad, and
covenanted to give him money. 6 And he consented, and
sought opportunity to deliver him unto them in the absence
of the multitude.
</quote>

<p>
The statement that <q>the feast of unleavened bread drew
nigh, which is called the Passover,</q> forms a fitting preface
to the story of the passion, for the Hebrew feast commemorated
the deliverance of Israel when the angel of death
passed over the homes which were marked with blood, and
now a greater redemption was to be purchased by the
blood of Christ, and those who would accept his salvation
were to put away sin from their lives, even as leaven was
excluded from Hebrew homes during all the days of the
feast.
</p>

<p>
The rulers of the Jews had already determined upon the
death of Jesus. Their problem lay in his immense popularity.
They were determining to delay until after the feast,
when the great crowds would have left the city, when suddenly
help came to them from a most unexpected quarter.
Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve immediate followers of
Jesus, offered to betray his Master into the hands of the
rulers at such a time and place as they desired, namely, <q>in
the absence of the multitude.</q> Of course the chief priests
and the officers of the Temple guard <q>were glad</q> and contracted
to pay the money demanded by the traitor for his
treachery. Luke states that Judas acted under the direction
of Satan. We are not to conclude, however, that he
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
was a demoniac or that he lacked control of his faculties.
His act was deliberate, unsolicited, and without excuse.
The explanation is that he long had been cherishing his lust
for gold. He had listened to the suggestion of Satan and
now he yielded himself to his foul service. The alarming
truth is that the treachery of Judas was not the act of a
unique monster, but only an example of what, finally, may
be done by any man who, in daily fellowship with Jesus,
does not renounce his one besetting sin. To resist continually
the gracious influence of the Saviour is to fall the more
rapidly under the complete power of Satan.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>B. The Last Supper. Ch. 22:7-38</head>

<quote rend="display">
7 And the day of unleavened bread came, on which the
passover must be sacrificed. 8 And he sent Peter and John,
saying, Go and make ready for us the passover, that we may
eat. 9 And they said unto him, Where wilt thou that we make
ready? 10 And he said unto them, Behold, when ye
are entered into the city, there shall meet you a man
bearing a pitcher of water; follow him into the house whereinto
he goeth. 11 And ye shall say unto the Master of the
house, The Teacher saith unto thee, Where is the guest-chamber,
where I shall eat the passover with my disciples?
12 And he will show you a large upper room furnished: there
make ready. 13 And they went, and found as he had said
unto them: and they made ready the passover.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
14 And when the hour was come, he sat down, and the
apostles with him. 15 And he said unto them, With desire
I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer:
16 For I say unto you, I shall not eat it, until it be fulfilled in
the kingdom of God. 17 And he received a cup, and when
he had given thanks, he said, Take this, and divide it among
yourselves: 18 for I say unto you, I shall not drink from
henceforth of the fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of God
shall come. 19 And he took bread, and when he had given
thanks, he brake it, and gave to them, saying, This is my
body which is given for you: this do in remembrance of me.
20 And the cup in like manner after supper, saying, This cup
is the new covenant in my blood, <hi rend='italic'>even</hi> that which is poured
out for you. 21 But behold, the hand of him that betrayeth
me is with me on the table. 22 For the Son of man indeed
goeth, as it hath been determined: but woe unto that man
through whom he is betrayed! 23 And they began to question
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
among themselves, which of them it was that should do this
thing.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
24 And there rose also a contention among them, which
of them was accounted to be the greatest. 25 And he said unto
them, The kings of the Gentiles have lordship over them;
and they that have authority over them are called Benefactors.
26 But ye <hi rend='italic'>shall</hi> not
<hi rend='italic'>be</hi> so: but he that is the greater among
you, let him become as the younger; and he that is chief, as
he that doth serve. 27 For which is greater, he that sitteth
at meat, or he that serveth? is not he that sitteth at meat?
but I am in the midst of you as he that serveth. 28 But ye are
they that have continued with me in my temptations; 29 and I
appoint unto you a kingdom, even as my Father appointed
unto me, 30 that ye may eat and drink at my table in my
kingdom; and ye shall sit on thrones judging the twelve
tribes of Israel. 31 Simon, Simon, behold, Satan asked to
have you, that he might sift you as wheat: 32 but I made
supplication for thee, that thy faith fail not; and do thou,
when once thou hast turned again, establish thy brethren.
33 And he said unto him, Lord, with thee I am ready to go
both to prison and to death. 34 And he said, I tell thee, Peter,
the cock shall not crow this day, until thou shalt thrice deny
that thou knowest me.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
35 And he said unto them, When I sent you forth without
purse, and wallet, and shoes, lacked ye anything? And they
said, Nothing. 36 And he said unto them, But now, he that
that hath a purse, let him take it, and likewise a wallet; and
he that hath none, let him sell his cloak, and buy a sword.
37 For I say unto you, that this which is written must be
fulfilled in me, And he was reckoned with transgressors:
for that which concerneth me hath fulfillment. 38 And they
said, Lord, behold, here are two swords. And he said unto
them, It is enough.
</quote>

<p>
The last meal of which Jesus partook with his disciples
was a passover feast, and it was the occasion of the establishment
of that sacrament which is known as the Lord's
Supper. The passover called to mind a national deliverance
in the past and pointed forward to a greater deliverance
to come, which was effected by the death of Christ.
The Lord's Supper points us backward to the great redemption
he achieved by his atoning death, and forward to the
fuller redemption he will accomplish in his return. The
<q>Last Supper</q> may rightly be reviewed in connection with
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
the Christian sacrament, and the story here recorded may
intimate to us how this sacrament may be most helpfully
observed.
</p>

<p>
1. It must be for us a time of retirement. So far as
possible we must exclude all distracting thoughts and fix
our minds upon Christ and his redeeming love. Jesus
made such provision for his disciples. He sent Peter and
John to the city to prepare a room in which he might partake
of the passover with his disciples, but he was careful
to provide against any possible interruption. He did not
mention to the disciples the place of meeting. Had he
done so, Judas would have disclosed the place to the enemies
who would have arrested Jesus in the midst of the
supper. Our Lord was careful to say to the two disciples
that as they entered the city there would meet them <q>a
man bearing a pitcher of water;</q> they were to follow
him into the house and were there to prepare the passover.
According to the account of the other evangelists,
it seems that after the passover feast had been eaten and
before Jesus established his memorial supper, he dismissed
Judas from the circle. Surely it must be our endeavor
to shut out from our hearts all traitorous and intrusive
thoughts, that during the sacred service we may be consciously
alone with our Lord.
</p>

<p>
2. It is to be a time of communion. Our Lord had
eagerly looked forward to those hours to be spent with his
disciples in unbroken fellowship. He had much to tell
them. He knew it was to be a season of tender farewell,
and he wished to strengthen them by messages of cheer and
of hope. Probably in the whole Bible there are no chapters
more familiar, more tender, more helpful, than those
written by John containing the words spoken by our Lord
in the upper room on the occasion of this Last Supper. To
those whose hearts are prepared, the unseen Lord is surely
present and ready to speak, through the appointed symbols
and by his Spirit, truths which will inspire strength and joy.
</p>

<p>
3. It is to be a season of gratitude. The sacrament has
often been called the <q>Eucharist,</q> the service of <q>thanksgiving,</q>
for we then call to mind the infinite benefits secured
for us by the atoning death of our Lord. This is the
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
supreme purpose of the feast. Jesus stated this clearly
when establishing it; the bread was to call to mind his body
broken for us, and the wine was to be a symbol of his blood,
which as he said to his disciples, was to be poured out for
them. This supper is therefore to be a memorial of redeeming
grace; it is to show forth the Lord's death, as he himself
said, <q>This do in remembrance of me.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. It is to be a time of hope. Even under the shadow of
the cross our Lord pointed his disciples to the glory of his
throne; while their hearts were torn by the thought of separation,
he reminded them of a reunion when they would
eat and drink together <q>in the kingdom of God.</q> He declared
that they were to have a time of temptation, but if
they suffered with him, they would also reign with him. <q>I
appoint unto you a kingdom, even as my Father appointed
unto me, that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom.</q>
Thus the communion season is a time when we especially
look forward to glad reunions with those who have
passed on before. We cheer our hearts with visions of
coming glory. Under the darkest shadows we look for the
opening skies and for the return of Christ; we <q>proclaim
the Lord's death till he come.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. It is a time of consecration. While the disciples
were seated at the table they were disputing as to which of
them was greatest. Our Saviour gave them a memorable
example when he stooped down and washed their feet, and
then most impressively he explained to them the character
of true greatness and showed that its essence lay in service;
to quote his own words, <q>He that is the greater among you,
let him become as the younger; and he that is chief, as he
that doth serve.</q> As we turn from the table of our Lord it
should ever be with a desire to go forth in his name and to
do anything in our power to serve our fellow men, and to
follow in his footsteps who came <q>not to be ministered unto
but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. It should be a time of humility, when we realize anew
our weakness and our dependence upon Christ and his sustaining
grace. Jesus found it necessary to warn his disciples
concerning their coming temptations and trials, and
particularly to foretell the fall of Peter. Turning to the
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
impulsive, affectionate, fickle disciple, who seems to have
been the leader of the apostolic band, he told him that
Satan had desired to have the disciples, to sift them as
wheat, but that Jesus himself had made special prayer for
Peter that his faith should not fail, even though Jesus foresaw
that for a time his courage would give way and that he
would deny his Master. He urged Peter, however, to repent
after his fall and to encourage his fellow disciples.
Such a statement of the weakness and unfaithfulness which
Peter was to manifest seemed incredible to him and he protested,
<q>Lord, with thee I am ready to go both to prison
and to death.</q> But Jesus sadly replied, <q>I tell thee, Peter,
the cock shall not crow this day, until thou shalt thrice
deny that thou knowest me.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is impossible to observe the Lord's Supper without
memories of past failure, and it is only too true that similar
experiences of weakness will be shown in days to come.
Every such disloyalty gives pain to our Lord, but if our
hearts are really yielded to him, our faults will be followed
by true repentance. If we really trust in him, he is ready
to pardon; as he prayed for Peter, so he is praying for us;
though we at times stumble, he will not allow us utterly to
fall. He is able to save <q>to the uttermost ... seeing he
ever liveth to make intercession</q> for us.
</p>

<p>
7. This should be a time of new resolution. We should
be humble and trustful in view of past and of possible future
failures, but we should determine to stand firmly in
the strength which the Master supplies. He told his followers
in the upper room of the changed conditions which
they were to meet when he had been taken from them.
The enemies who would take his life would surely not treat
his disciples with kindness. He assured them that they
were now to be left more to their own resources and that
they were to meet with the most bitter hostility. He even
suggested that it would be necessary for each one to buy
a sword. They took his words with absurd literalness and
they said, <q>Lord, behold, here are two swords.</q> It was
with sad irony that Jesus replied, <q>It is enough.</q> Of
course, he did not mean that his followers are to use violence
or are to extend the gospel by means of force. He
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
only wished us to be warned and to resolve anew that in the
spiritual conflict which awaits us we shall be true to him as
loyal soldiers of the cross. We go forth to battle, but on
some brighter morrow we shall be seated with him at a
heavenly feast with banquet and song.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>C. The Agony In Gethsemane. Ch. 22:39-46</head>

<quote rend="display">
39 And he came out, and went, as his custom was, unto
the mount of Olives; and the disciples also followed him.
40 And when he was at the place, he said unto them, Pray
that ye enter not into temptation. 41 And he was parted
from them about a stone's cast; and he kneeled down and
prayed, 42 saying, Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup
from me: nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done. 43
And there appeared unto him an angel from heaven, strengthening
him. 44 And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly;
and his sweat became as it were great drops of blood
falling down upon the ground. 45 And when he rose up from
his prayer, he came unto the disciples, and found them
sleeping for sorrow, 46 and said unto them, Why sleep ye?
rise and pray, that ye enter not into temptation.
</quote>

<p>
From the quiet fellowship in the upper room Jesus with
his disciples, under the shadow of the night, went forth to
the Garden of Gethsemane, a favorite resort on the slope of
the Mount of Olives, and he there experienced that unequaled
anguish of soul which is commonly known as his
<q>agony.</q> To enter the sacred privacy of that scene even
in imagination seems to be an intrusion, and yet some
glimpses have been revealed for our instruction and encouragement
as his disciples.
</p>

<p>
There can be no doubt that this distress which seized
him was due to his clear vision of the death he was to endure
on the following day; and this very agony adds beyond
measure to the meaning and the mystery of that
death. For any sensitive soul to shrink from pain and
anguish is but natural and pardonable; yet if Jesus suffered
such incomparable agony simply in view of physical torture,
he was less heroic than many of his followers have
been. If, however, in the hour of death, he was to be so
identified with sin as to become the Redeemer of the
world; if he was <q>to give his life a ransom for many;</q> if
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
his experience as the Lamb of God was to be absolutely
unique; if he was to endure the hiding of his Father's face,
then we can understand why it was that in the dark hour
of anticipation his soul was sorrowful <q>even unto death.</q>
The agony of our Lord must never be supposed to reflect
upon his human heroism; it is rather a proof of his divine
atonement. The <q>cup</q> which Jesus was asked to drink
consisted of death as <q>the Bearer of sin.</q>
</p>

<p>
In this hour of most bitter trial Jesus found relief in
prayer. He had come to Gethsemane that he might be
alone with God. He had exhorted his disciples to follow
his example. When the agony most fiercely gripped his
lonely heart he still prayed and he was heard. The cup
was not removed, but <q>There appeared unto him an angel
from heaven, strengthening him.</q> He was given grace
to drain the cup to its very dregs and death lost its sting
and the grave its terror. He was fitted for perfect sympathy
with those who are called upon to face the mystery
of <q>unanswered prayer.</q> <q>He became unto all them that
obey him the author of eternal salvation.</q>
</p>

<p>
Jesus prayed in faith; and the very essence of such believing
prayer is the willingness to obey. This was the petition
which comes to us as an example, <q>Nevertheless not
my will, but thine, be done.</q> He won his victory by complete
submission to the will of his Father. Henceforth
there was no more struggle. He turned with unfaltering
step to meet betrayal and agony and death. The hour
struck and he was ready. <q>He was well content.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>D. The Arrest Of Jesus. Ch. 22:47-53</head>

<quote rend="display">
47 While he yet spake, behold, a multitude, and he that
was called Judas, one of the twelve, went before them; and
he drew near unto Jesus to kiss him. 48 But Jesus said
unto him, Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss?
49 And when they that were about him saw what would
follow, they said, Lord, shall we smite with the sword? 50
And a certain one of them smote the servant of the high
priest, and struck off his right ear. 51 But Jesus answered
and said, Suffer ye <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> thus far. And he touched his ear,
and healed him. 52 And Jesus said unto the chief priests,
and captains of the temple, and elders, that were come against
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
him, Are ye come out, as against a robber, with swords and
staves? 53 When I was daily with you in the temple, ye
stretched not forth your hands against me: but this is your
hour, and the power of darkness.
</quote>

<p>
The manner in which Judas concluded his foul crime was
in perfect keeping with its essential baseness. He led a
multitude armed with swords and clubs into the Garden
where his Master was wont to retire for prayer, and there
betrayed him with a kiss, a sign which had been agreed
upon in order that, in the deep shadows, one of the disciples
might not be mistaken for the Master and arrested in his
place. A kiss was a usual sign of friendship, but the manner
of Judas and the rebuke of Jesus indicate that it was given
with a false semblance of deep affection and was thus the
more repulsive to the Lord. Acts of disloyalty to Christ
are even more distressing to him in surroundings which are
sacred and when committed by those who have made loud
protestations of love.
</p>

<p>
The fearless composure of the Master is now contrasted
with the conduct of his followers. They asked whether
they should defend him with the sword, and before he could
reply, Peter rashly smote the servant of the high priest and
cut off his right ear. To this act Jesus made reply, <q>Suffer
ye them thus far;</q> the exact meaning is not certain, but
probably he was addressing his disciples to prevent further
violence. He then touched the ear of the servant and
healed him. Only Luke, <q>the beloved physician,</q> mentions
this <q>unique miracle of surgery.</q> The incident has
its message for disciples in all ages. Violence and cruelty
in the defense of the cause of Christ misrepresent him to the
world. The act of Peter gave countenance to charges
which would be preferred against Jesus, and further resistance
would have compromised the position of his Lord.
However well intended, such rash defenses weaken the
cause they are designed to promote.
</p>

<p>
Jesus turned to rebuke his enemies and resented the fact
that they had come against him as against a robber with
swords and clubs. He reminded them that daily he had
taught in public. Their coming with violence, in secrecy;
and under the cover of night, was a proof that the arrest
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
was false and that it could not be justified. There had been
abundant opportunities during many days to seize him in
public when he was unprotected. Their present course
bore its own condemnation; but he added mournfully,
<q>This is your hour, and the power of darkness.</q> In the
mystery of his providence God was allowing this iniquity.
He was giving this temporary authority to the forces of evil.
It was to be a brief hour, but those who willingly put it to
such a use would incur eternal condemnation. Nothing is
more solemn than the possibility of using for evil ends the
liberty allotted us of God.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>E. Peter's Denial. Ch. 22:54-62</head>

<quote rend="display">
54 And they seized him, and led him <hi rend='italic'>away</hi>, and brought
him into the high priest's house. But Peter followed afar off.
55 And when they had kindled a fire in the midst of the court,
and had sat down together, Peter sat in the midst of them.
56 And a certain maid seeing him as he sat in the light <hi rend='italic'>of
the fire</hi>, and looking stedfastly upon him, said, This man
also was with him. 57 But he denied, saying, Woman, I
know him not. 58 And after a little while another saw him,
and said, Thou also art <hi rend='italic'>one</hi> of them. But Peter said, Man,
I am not. 59 And after the space of about one hour another
confidently affirmed, saying, Of a truth this man also was
with him; for he is a Galilæan. 60 But Peter said, Man, I
know not what thou sayest. And immediately, while he yet
spake, the cock crew. 61 And the Lord turned, and looked
upon Peter. And Peter remembered the word of the Lord,
how that he said unto him, Before the cock crow this day
thou shalt deny me thrice. 62 And he went out, and wept
bitterly.
</quote>

<p>
Peter really loved Jesus and his faith in him never failed;
but in the hour of trial, which Jesus had predicted, Peter
lost courage and denied his Lord. His sin, however, was
unlike that of Judas. The latter was the final step in a
downward course. The former was an act of cowardice in
a career of moral development which resulted in blessing
and service to all the followers of Christ.
</p>

<p>
The fall of Peter may be traced to his self-confidence.
When he protested that he would be true to Christ, even
though all should forsake him, he was sincere and expressed
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
the true feeling of his heart, but he betrayed his pride. The
immediate result was his failure to obey the Master and to
watch and pray as he had been bidden; and consequently
he was surprised and stunned by the arrest of Jesus, and
like the other disciples, after a rash stroke in his defense, he
forsook Jesus and fled. He followed Jesus to the palace of
the high priest but hoped to conceal his discipleship and to
be regarded as one of the excited crowd.
</p>

<p>
Every follower of Christ is in mortal danger when confident
of his moral strength and especially when at the same
time he is ashamed to be publicly known as a disciple, and
most of all when he feels, as Peter probably felt, that confessed
loyalty to Christ can under the circumstances be of
no special help to his Lord. At such a time when the cause
of Jesus seemed hopeless, when the courage of Peter was
gone, when he was wearied by the long night of sleeplessness,
when cold and lonely, the unexpected attack was
made and Peter suffered his tragic defeat.
</p>

<p>
It may be easy to point the finger of scorn at the great
apostle, but there are few followers of Christ who at times
of less severe testing have not as truly denied their Lord, by
word or deed, with cowardice and deceit and passion.
Three times Peter repeated his denial and then he heard the
crowing of a cock. The incident was insignificant in itself,
but it recalled the word of his Master; it made Peter conscious
of his disgrace but it called him to himself, and then
as he turned toward the palace, for a moment he caught
sight of his Lord. We may be unable to conjecture what
was expressed in the face of Jesus as at that moment he
<q>looked upon Peter.</q> There may have been something of
rebuke, but probably there was more of unutterable sorrow
and of tender sympathy. We read that as <q>Peter remembered
the word of the Lord, ... he went out, and wept
bitterly.</q> Surely these were tears of repentance and they
prepared the way for pardon and for peace. To many a
fallen follower of Christ there has come some minute providence
recalling hours of glad fellowship and messages of
solemn warning, and the heart has been turned toward the
Master, and true repentance has been felt in realizing the
pain which the disloyalty has brought to the loving Lord.
</p>

<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>

<p>
The consciousness has brought bitter tears and hours of
regret and of anguish, but they have been followed by a
brighter morning, by a meeting with the risen Christ, by a
new confession of love, by words of peace, and by a truer
life of deeper devotion to his cause.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>F. Jesus Before The Jewish Rulers. Ch. 22:63-71</head>

<quote rend="display">
63 And the men that held <hi rend='italic'>Jesus</hi> mocked him, and beat
him. 64 And they blindfolded him, and asked him, saying,
Prophesy: who is he that struck thee? 65 And many other
things spake they against him, reviling him.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
66 And as soon as it was day, the assembly of the elders
of the people was gathered together, both chief priests and
scribes; and they led him away into their council, saying,
67 If thou art the Christ, tell us. But he said unto them, If
I tell you, ye will not believe: 68 and if I ask <hi rend='italic'>you</hi>, ye will not
answer. 69 But from henceforth shall the Son of man be
seated at the right hand of the power of God. 70 And they
all said, Art thou then the Son of God? And he said unto
them, Ye say that I am. 71 And they said, What further
need have we of witness? for we ourselves have heard from
his own mouth.
</quote>

<p>
After Jesus had been denied by Peter, he was grossly insulted
and abused by his captors. He was mocked and
beaten and reviled. Those responsible for these indignities
were the Jewish rulers, the most cultured and refined
and professedly religious men of their day; but the beast
within man is more powerful than we commonly suppose.
When Christ is rejected, when his teachings are despised,
when his Spirit is opposed, then it is only a question of time
and of occasion when hatred or malice or lust or anger
awaken in man the passions and ferocity of the brute.
</p>

<p>
When the morning dawned, Jesus was led away to be arraigned
formally before the sanhedrin, the supreme ecclesiastical
court of the Jews. He was supposed to be on trial
for his life; in reality the council was being judged, and in
its guilt the entire nation was involved. The rulers convicted
themselves of prejudice, dishonesty, and malice.
They did not seek to learn the truth that justice might be
done; they sought to find some evidence on which Jesus
might be condemned.
</p>

<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>

<p>
When every attempt to convict Jesus had failed, they
finally charged him in the words: <q>If thou art the Christ,
tell us.</q> Jesus' reply shows how fully he appreciated their
blind hatred and their unwillingness to be just; he told
them that no statement he might make would be believed,
and that no explanation or defense he might offer would be
accepted; nevertheless, he would answer their question,
with the statement that his exaltation to the place of divine
power was about to take place. Then they asked him
directly, <q>Art thou then the Son of God?</q> He answered
with all distinctness, <q>Ye say that I am.</q> Then they at
once decreed that he was worthy of death. They had prejudged
the case. They were unwilling to consider whether
his claim to be the Son of God was true; they only wished to
be sure that he made the claim. When they had made sure
of this, they agreed that he must die as a blasphemer. Their
logic was so far true. There is no other alternative. In
the presence of Christ there can be no neutrality. Either
he was an impostor who deserves our contempt, or else he
is the divine Son of God whom we must worship and obey.
Every soul must choose between the sanhedrin and the
Church.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>G. Jesus Before Pilate. Ch. 23:1-25</head>

<quote rend="display">
1 And the whole company of them rose up, and brought
him before Pilate. 2 And they began to accuse him, saying,
We found this man perverting our nation, and forbidding
to give tribute to Cæsar, and saying that he himself is Christ
a king. 3 And Pilate asked him, saying, Art thou the King
of the Jews? And he answered him and said, Thou sayest.
4 And Pilate said unto the chief priests and the multitudes,
I find no fault in this man. 5 But they were the more urgent,
saying, He stirreth up the people, teaching throughout all
Judæa, and beginning from Galilee even unto this place.
6 But when Pilate heard it, he asked whether the man were
a Galilæan. 7 And when he knew that he was of Herod's
jurisdiction, he sent him unto Herod, who himself also was
at Jerusalem in these days.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
8 Now when Herod saw Jesus, he was exceeding glad:
for he was of a long time desirous to see him, because he had
heard concerning him; and he hoped to see some miracle
done by him. 9 And he questioned him in many words; but
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
he answered him nothing. 10 And the chief priests and the
scribes stood, vehemently accusing him. 11 And Herod
with his soldiers set him at nought, and mocked him, and
arraying him in gorgeous apparel sent him back to Pilate.
12 And Herod and Pilate became friends with each other
that very day: for before they were at enmity between themselves.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
13 And Pilate called together the chief priests and the
rulers and the people, 14 and said unto them, Ye brought
unto me this man, as one that perverteth the people: and
behold, I, having examined him before you, found no fault
in this man touching those things whereof ye accuse him:
15 no, nor yet Herod: for he sent him back unto us; and
behold, nothing worthy of death hath been done by him.
16 I will therefore chastise him, and release him. 18 But
they cried out all together, saying, Away with this man, and
release unto us Barabbas&mdash;19 one who for a certain insurrection
made in the city, and for murder, was cast into prison.
20 And Pilate spake unto them again, desiring to release
Jesus; 21 but they shouted, saying, Crucify, crucify him.
22 And he said unto them the third time, Why, what evil
hath this man done? I have found no cause of death in him:
I will therefore chastise him and release him. 23 But they
were urgent with loud voices, asking that he might be crucified.
And their voices prevailed. 24 And Pilate gave sentence
that what they asked for should be done. 25 And he
released him that for insurrection and murder had been
cast into prison, whom they asked for; but Jesus he delivered
up to their will.
</quote>

<p>
The Jews had been deprived by their Roman conquerors
of the right to inflict capital punishment. When, therefore,
their chief council had decided that Jesus was worthy
of death, the rulers brought him to Pilate, the Roman governor,
that he might confirm their sentence and execute the
cruel penalty of crucifixion. The trial before Pilate developed
into a disgraceful contest between the murderous and
determined Jewish rulers and the weak and vacillating
Roman governor, who was at last compelled to act contrary
to his conscience and his desire and to submit his will
to that of the subjects whom he detested.
</p>

<p>
Luke gives only a bare outline of the story, which is
sketched best by the apostle John. Enough, however, is
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
given to show the infamous baseness of the Jews and the
futile endeavors of Pilate to avoid the judicial murder
which he finally committed. The Jewish rulers had asked
Pilate to pronounce sentence without hearing the charge;
this Pilate properly refused to do. When the accusation
was made, Luke shows most clearly how craftily the decision
of the Jewish court was perverted, and how forcibly the
false charge was presented. Jesus had been convicted of
claiming to be the divine Messiah. It was the claim of
deity, and thus of blasphemy, on which he was condemned.
The Jews knew that this would make no impression on
Pilate. However, the office of Messiah did imply rule and
authority, and therefore the claim of Jesus was distorted
into a political offense and he was charged with sedition,
with forbidding tribute to Cæsar, and with claiming to be a
king.
</p>

<p>
How absurd all these accusations were, Pilate soon
learned; he probably was not a little suspicious of the sudden
zeal for their Roman tyrants shown by these rebellious
Jews. However, he lacked the courage of his convictions;
he declared Jesus to be innocent, but fearing to offend the
rulers and the crowds whom they had won to their will, he
hesitated to release Jesus. That was a fatal step; the only
thing to do is to act with decision and promptness as soon
as one sees what is right. It is surely true in matters of
conscience that <q>he who hesitates is lost.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then Pilate did what all weak men are apt to do: he attempted
to avoid making a decision; he tried to shift the
responsibility; he learned that Jesus was from Galilee, and
so Pilate sent Jesus to be judged by King Herod, within
whose realm Galilee lay. Herod was then in Jerusalem,
and he was eager to see Jesus, of whom he had heard so
much, and he hoped that his curiosity might be gratified
by seeing Jesus perform some miracle. However, when
appearing before Herod, Jesus refused even to answer him
by a single word. Jesus has a message for every penitent,
and a miracle for every believer; but for the murderer of
John and for the shallow, sinful profligate there is only
silence and contempt.
</p>

<p>
To wreak upon Jesus a petty revenge, Herod mocked
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
Jesus by clothing him with royal apparel, and sent him
back thus arrayed to Pilate. It was a cruel jest, but it was
an acquittal of Jesus as guilty of no political offense. Thus
Pilate was forced to act as judge; others cannot decide for
us questions of conscience. When compelled to act, Pilate
attempted a second maneuver familiar to all weak souls; he
proposed to compromise. He would do what was wrong
but he would avoid the crime of murder. He offered to
scourge Jesus, whom he declared to be absolutely innocent,
or to release him as a notable criminal, as one such was
usually released at this feast. On the one hand, he would
be subjecting Jesus to the most agonizing bodily torture;
on the other, he would brand Jesus as a malefactor who had
deserved death. Compromise in a case of conscience is
always a sign of weakness, and the enemy is sure to press
his advantage. As the rulers saw Pilate yielding thus far,
they asked for the release of a notorious murderer by the
name of Barabbas; and as they saw Jesus coming forth
from the scourging, torn and bleeding, they cried out for
his life, <q>Crucify him, crucify him.</q> As Pilate hesitated,
the rulers used their most deadly weapon; they suggested
that they would report Pilate to the emperor as shielding a
political revolutionist; they would imperil the position and
life of the governor. This attack Pilate could not withstand;
when some personal loss was involved conscience
was no longer to be considered. He decided to do what he
knew to be wrong; he <q>gave sentence that what they asked
for should be done;</q> and so doing he placed himself near
the head of that long list of moral cowards who share his
eternal infamy for fearing to do the right.
</p>

<p>
The degradation of the Jewish rulers was even greater.
With all their knowledge of the moral law, they who
professed to be special representatives of God put to
death his Son, and chose a murderer instead of the
Saviour. To the tragedy of such a choice Luke refers
with horror in the only personal comment he makes upon
the scene. V. 25. Are not thousands, however, making
that same choice to-day? There can be no neutral ground;
indecision is impossible: one must choose either Barabbas
or Christ.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>H. The Crucifixion. Ch. 23:26-38</head>

<quote rend="display">
26 And when they led him away, they laid hold upon one
Simon of Cyrene, coming from the country, and laid on him
the cross, to bear it after Jesus.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
27 And there followed him a great multitude of the people,
and of women who bewailed and lamented him. 28 But
Jesus turning unto them said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep
not for me, but weep for yourselves, and for your children.
29 For behold, the days are coming, in which they shall say,
Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that never bare, and
the breasts that never gave suck. 30 Then shall they begin
to say to the mountains, Fall on us; and to the hills, Cover us.
31 For if they do these things in the green tree, what shall
be done in the dry?
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
32 And there were also two others, malefactors, led with
him to be put to death.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
33 And when they came unto the place which is called
The skull, there they crucified him, and the malefactors, one
on the right hand and the other on the left. 34 And Jesus
said, Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do.
And parting his garments among them, they cast lots. 35
And the people stood beholding. And the rulers also scoffed
at him, saying, He saved others; let him save himself, if
this is the Christ of God, his chosen. 36 And the soldiers
also mocked him, coming to him, offering him vinegar, 37 and
saying, If thou art the King of the Jews, save thyself. 38 And
there was also a superscription over him, <hi rend='smallcaps'>This Is The
King of the Jews</hi>.
</quote>

<p>
The Gospel narratives spare us the distressing details of
the crucifixion; this was the most cruel and agonizing form
of death; but the facts are written with surprising delicacy
and reserve. As Jesus was being led from the city a certain
Simon of Cyrene was pressed into the service of bearing his
cross. The cause of this action is purely a matter of conjecture.
Its result was to give Simon immortal fame and
apparently to secure for him eternal salvation; for it seems
that this experience, and the knowledge of Christ gained at
Calvary, resulted in the conversion of Simon and his household,
Mark 15:21; Rom. 16:13. In a figure, he was the
first of that long line of men and women who have taken up
the cross and followed Christ. Of course this is a mere
symbol, and the actual contrasts are vital. In reality no
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
one can share the burden of the cross which our Saviour
bore. His sufferings, and his alone, made atonement for
sin. Then again no one can be compelled to take up the
cross. There are burdens in life which cannot be evaded
but one can refuse the cross. It is a type of the voluntary
suffering endured for the sake of Christ; it is a symbol of the
complete sacrifice of self and the complete submission to his
will which is necessary for all who share in the redeeming
benefits of his death.
</p>

<p>
Luke alone records the incident of the women who, wailing
and lamenting, followed Jesus out of the city. It is
quite fitting that in this Gospel, in which womanhood is so
exalted, a place should be found for this picture. It is not
to be supposed that these were the loyal friends who had
followed Jesus on his journeys and helped to supply his
needs; these were rather residents of Jerusalem whose
hearts were bleeding with sorrow for the loving Prophet
who was being led forth to an agonizing death. Our Lord
turned to these women with a message of sympathy and
told them that they were not to weep for him but for themselves
and their children. He was not rebuking them for
their compassion; he rather meant to indicate that while
his sufferings were pitiful, their own were more worthy of
tears, for they were to be even more intense. He had in
mind the destruction of the city due to its impenitence and
made certain by its rejection of the Redeemer. Jesus declared
that the days would come when childlessness would
be a ground for congratulation because of the universal
distress. He predicted that the horror would be so great
that men would call upon the mountains to fall on them
and the hills to cover them, preferring such forms of death
to the torments which threatened from the armies of Rome.
Jesus added a proverb, the force of which is evident even
though its exact application may not be clear: <q>For if they
do these things in the green tree, what shall be done in the
dry?</q> In other words, if the sufferings of Christ were so
great, what would be the sufferings of the Jews! If the
Romans were putting to death him whom they regarded as
innocent, what would they do to the inhabitants of the
rebellious and hated city? It is quite in accordance with
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
the character of Luke to note how Jesus, in this very hour
of his anguish, thought rather of others than of himself and
pronounced this prophesy, not in resentment, but in infinite
tenderness and pity.
</p>

<p>
While the actual sufferings of the crucifixion are not described,
Luke tells us of the cruel mockery to which Jesus
was subjected. He states that two malefactors were crucified
with Jesus, <q>one on the right hand and the other on
the left.</q> This was evidently designed to add to the
disgrace and humiliation of his cruel death. The place
of the crucifixion was called <q>The skull,</q> probably because
it was a bare, rounded hill located outside the city
gates.
</p>

<p>
Of the seven words spoken by Jesus on the cross, Luke
records three, all of them characterized by love and trust.
The first is found in no other Gospel. As Jesus tasted the
first bitterness of his anguish he was heard to pray, <q>Father
forgive them; for they know not what they do.</q> He did
not have in mind simply the soldiers who were involuntary
instruments of his death, but rather the Jews who had not
fully recognized the enormity of their crime. For them
Jesus felt no hatred in his heart. He yearned for their repentance
and their salvation. This prayer was a revelation
of the matchless grace and mercy of this ideal Man.
Luke adds the details of the mockery to which the other
evangelists likewise refer. The crowds stood gazing upon
the Sufferer but the rulers and the soldiers cruelly mocked
him; the former scoffed at him saying, <q>He saved others;
let him save himself.</q> In reality, had he saved himself, he
never could have saved others. He died for the very men
who were deriding him, to make possible their salvation.
The soldiers made sport of him by casting lots for his garments
and by offering him drink and hailing him as <q>King
of the Jews.</q> This last title had been placed on the cross
above the head of Jesus. It was put there by Pilate in
bitter irony. It was his way of taking revenge upon the
rulers who, contrary to his conscience, had compelled him
to put to death an innocent Man. In place of this superscription
the eye of faith sees another, <q>Behold, the Lamb
of God, that taketh away the sin of the world!</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>I. The Penitent Thief. Ch. 23:39-43</head>

<quote rend="display">
39 And one of the malefactors that were hanged railed
on him, saying, Art not thou the Christ? save thyself and us.
40 But the other answered, and rebuking him said, Dost
thou not even fear God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation?
41 And we indeed justly; for we receive the due
reward of our deeds: but this man hath done nothing amiss.
42 And he said, Jesus, remember me when thou comest in
thy kingdom. 43 And he said unto him, Verily I say unto
thee, To-day shalt thou be with me in Paradise.
</quote>

<p>
This story which enshrines for us the second saying of
our Lord upon the cross has often been regarded as one of
the most significant narratives in the Gospels: first, because
it gives us such a picture of the unique person of
Christ; here was a dying man who at the same time was a
forgiving God. Then, here is a picture of the transforming
power of Christ who in an instant of time changed a robber
into a saint. Most of all, we have here a message of the
conditions of salvation which are ever the same, namely,
repentance and faith. The first of these conditions is
strikingly illustrated from the fact that the repentant thief
was thinking of God and remembering that it was against a
divine Being that he had sinned. Of this fact he reminded
his companion, intimating that they might properly fear
him into whose august presence they were so soon to be
ushered. It is the very essence of repentance to regard sin,
not as a mistake or a weakness, or as an injury to men, but
as rebellion and insult against God. His penitence was
further shown in his recognition that the penalty which he
was suffering was just, and in his recognition of the innocent
sufferings of Christ.
</p>

<p>
His faith was as remarkable as his repentance. He saw
in the bleeding, dying Sufferer, One who is yet to return as
universal King, and to him he addressed his prayer: <q>Jesus,
remember me when thou comest in thy kingdom.</q> We do
not know the source of such faith. The robber may have
heard part of the trial of Jesus; he did hear him praying for
his enemies; but whatever gave rise to his belief and trust,
he regarded Jesus as a Saviour and Lord who was yet to
reign and who could bring him to eternal glory. This
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
story thus reveals to us the truth that salvation is conditioned
upon repentance and faith. However, it contains
other important messages also. It declares that salvation
is independent of sacraments. The thief had never been
baptized, nor had he partaken of the Lord's Supper. It is
obvious that had he lived he would have carried out the
requirements of his Lord by accepting these sacraments.
He did, in fact, boldly confess his faith in the presence of a
hostile crowd and amid the taunts and jeers of rulers and
soldiers, yet he was saved without any formal rites.
</p>

<p>
It is further evident that salvation is independent of good
works. The thief was pardoned before he had lived a single,
righteous, innocent day. Of course, good works follow
faith; they evidence its reality; but faith precedes and results
in holiness. A life of goodness is an expression of
gratitude for salvation already begun.
</p>

<p>
It is further evident that there is no <q>sleep of the soul.</q>
The body may sleep, but consciousness persists after death.
The word of the Master was, <q>To-day shalt thou be ... in
Paradise.</q> Again it is evident that there is no <q>purgatory.</q>
If any man ever needed discipline and <q>purifying
fires,</q> it was this penitent robber. Out of a life of sin and
shame he passed immediately into a state of blessedness.
This was the promise: <q>To-day shalt thou be with me in
Paradise.</q>
</p>

<p>
Again it may be remarked that salvation is not universal.
There were two robbers; only one was saved. Jesus had
heard them both speaking of him. He did not say <q>ye,</q>
but <q>Verily I say unto thee, To-day shalt thou be with me
in Paradise.</q>
</p>

<p>
Last of all, it may be noted that the very essence of the
joy which lies beyond death consists in personal communion
with Christ. The heart of the promise to the dying
thief was this: <q>Thou shalt be with me.</q> This is our
blessed assurance, that to depart is <q>to be with Christ,</q>
which is <q>very far better.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>J. The Death And Burial. Ch. 23:44-56</head>

<quote rend="display">
44 And it was now about the sixth hour, and a darkness
came over the whole land until the ninth hour, 45 the sun's
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
light failing: and the veil of the temple was rent in the midst.
46 And Jesus, crying with a loud voice, said, Father, into thy
hands I commend my spirit: and having said this, he gave
up the ghost. 47 And when the centurion saw what was done,
he glorified God, saying, Certainly this was a righteous man.
48 And all the multitudes that came together to this sight,
when they beheld the things that were done, returned smiting
their breasts. 49 And all his acquaintance, and the women
that followed with him from Galilee, stood afar off, seeing
these things.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
50 And behold, a man named Joseph, who was a councillor,
a good and righteous man 51 (he had not consented to their
counsel and deed), <hi rend='italic'>a man</hi> of Arimathæa, a city of the Jews,
who was looking for the kingdom of God: 52 this man went
to Pilate, and asked for the body of Jesus. 53 And he took
it down, and wrapped it in a linen cloth, and laid him in a tomb
that was hewn in stone, where never man had yet lain.
54 And it was the day of the Preparation, and the sabbath
drew on. 55 And the women who had come with him out
of Galilee, followed after, and beheld the tomb, and how his
body was laid. 56 And they returned and prepared spices
and ointments.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
And on the sabbath they rested according to the commandment.
</quote>

<p>
The death of Christ was an event of such supreme importance
that it properly was accompanied by supernatural
signs of deep significance. Of these Luke mentions two.
The first was the darkened skies, a fit symbol of the blackest
crime in all the history of man. The second was the
rending of the Temple veil, a type of the <q>new and living
way</q> opened into the presence of God for all believers.
Thus these two signs correspond to the human and the
divine aspects of this atoning death, and indicate the heinousness
of sin and the purpose of redeeming grace.
</p>

<p>
The last word spoken by Jesus on the cross was an expression
of perfect trust and peace. He had shown his
sympathy for others by his prayer, by his promise to the
penitent thief, and by his provision for his mother; by three
other words he had revealed his sufferings of mind and body
and their result in a completed redemption: <q>My God, my
God ...</q>; <q>I thirst;</q> <q>it is finished.</q> He now breathed
out his soul in a sentence of absolute confidence taken from
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
the psalmist and recorded by Luke alone: <q>Father, into
thy hands I commend my spirit.</q> It was the supreme
utterance of faith. The earthly ministry of the Son of God
had ended.
</p>

<p>
Luke notes the effects produced by the manner of Jesus'
death, and by the accompanying signs upon the Roman
centurion, the Jewish multitudes, and the Christian disciples.
The soldier was so impressed that he <q>glorified
God,</q> giving his testimony to the fact that the One whom
he had crucified as a criminal was a <q>righteous man.</q>
Possibly he may be regarded as a type of that host of believing
Gentiles, of whom Luke liked to write, who were yet
to enlist under the banner of the cross.
</p>

<p>
The crowds of Jews had little real desire for the crucifixion
of Jesus; they had been hounded by their rulers to cry
out for his death, but they now returned to the city <q>smiting
their breasts</q> in an agony of remorse, a prophecy of
Israel's future repentance and mourning as they <q>look on
him whom they pierced.</q>
</p>

<p>
Most pathetic of all was that group of saddened disciples
who <q>stood afar off</q> gazing in bewilderment upon the
scene; but for them the meaning of that cross would begin
to dawn as they should meet their risen Lord. For none of
his followers has the cross lost its mystery; yet to them all
it has become a symbol of triumph and of hope.
</p>

<p>
The body of Jesus was given burial by Joseph of Arimathæa,
a man whom Matthew designates as rich, Mark as a
<q>councillor of honorable estate,</q> and Luke as <q>good and
righteous.</q> Thus together they describe an ideal man from
the Jewish and Roman and Greek point of view. Perhaps
he is to be criticized for not having identified himself
before this more publicly with the cause of Christ; but
Luke makes not the slightest unfavorable reflection upon
his character. He declares definitely that this powerful and
influential member of the sanhedrin <q>had not consented</q>
to the <q>counsel and deed</q> of the rulers who had compassed
the death of Jesus; and now in the hour when his
Master was most deeply dishonored, he risked the scorn of
the people and the hatred of the rulers and begged from
Pilate the body of Jesus, which he wrapped in linen cloth
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
and lay reverently in his own new, rock-hewn tomb. It
was a deed of loving devotion, and adds a gratifying contrast
and a touch of tenderness to the story of the cross.
</p>

<p>
Other loving hearts longed to have a part in this expression
of affection. The women who had followed Jesus
out of Galilee, noted the place of his burial and purchased
perfumes to embalm the body of their Lord. However, as
the declining sun marked the beginning, at eventide, of the
Sabbath, they rested until the first day of the week, and
then they found that their task was needless. It was well
to show affection for the crucified Master, it is a greater
privilege to serve a risen Lord.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>K. The Empty Tomb. Ch. 24:1-12</head>

<quote rend="display">
1 But on the first day of the week, at early dawn, they
came unto the tomb, bringing the spices which they had prepared.
2 And they found the stone rolled away from the
tomb. 3 And they entered in, and found not the body of the
Lord Jesus. 4 And it came to pass, while they were perplexed
thereabout, behold, two men stood by them in dazzling apparel:
5 and as they were affrighted and bowed down their faces to
the earth, they said unto them, Why seek ye the living among
the dead? 6 He is not here, but is risen: remember how he
spake unto you when he was yet in Galilee, 7 saying that the
Son of man must be delivered up into the hands of sinful men,
and be crucified, and the third day rise again. 8 And they
remembered his words, 9 and returned from the tomb, and
told all these things to the eleven, and to all the rest. 10 Now
they were Mary Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary the <hi rend='italic'>mother</hi>
of James: and the other women with them told these things
unto the apostles. 11 And these words appeared in their
sight as idle talk; and they disbelieved them. 12 But Peter
arose, and ran unto the tomb; and stooping and looking in,
he seeth the linen cloths by themselves; and he departed to
his home, wondering at that which was come to pass.
</quote>

<p>
After seeing where Jesus was buried the women who had
followed him from Galilee and had ministered to him,
began preparing spices and ointments with which to
embalm his body. However, as the day drew to its
close, because this Friday evening was the beginning of a
Jewish Sabbath, they rested from their labor of love until
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
Sunday, <q>the first day of the week,</q> and then <q>at early
dawn</q> they came to the tomb, but were astonished to find
that the body of Jesus was gone.
</p>

<p>
There are several explanations of this empty tomb,
but only one which is credible and which accords with
the facts. Some persons profess to believe that Jesus
did not die, that he only swooned upon the cross, that he
regained consciousness after being laid in the tomb, that
he escaped and then appeared to his disciples; but Jesus
had declared that he was to die and was to rise again on
the third day, and he afterwards made his disciples believe
that such an experience had been his; this theory, therefore,
cannot be held without denying the honesty and
morality of our Lord.
</p>

<p>
A second theory maintains that <q>his disciples came by
night, and stole</q> away his body; but these disciples continually
declared that he rose from the dead on the third
day; according to this theory, then, these disciples were
impostors; but this can be believed by no one familiar
with their subsequent lives and influence.
</p>

<p>
It is as impossible to believe the third theory namely, that
the enemies of Jesus stole his body, for had that body
been in their possession, how gladly they would have
produced it and thus forever have silenced the disciples
who declared that Jesus was alive and that his resurrection
proved these enemies had put to death an innocent
Man, their divine Messiah.
</p>

<p>
The only true explanation of this empty tomb is that
given to the wondering women by two angels: <q>Why
seek ye the living among the dead? He is not here, but
is risen: remember how he spake unto you when he was
yet in Galilee.</q> This startling statement of the angels
embodies the substance of the message delivered by the
apostles. The truth it declares forms the corner stone
of Christian faith. The resurrection of our Lord is vitally
connected with all the realities which relate to his person
and work and to the life of his followers.
</p>

<p>
When, however, the fact of the resurrection had been
reported to the apostles, they regarded the words of the
women <q>as idle talk, and they disbelieved them.</q> This
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
incredulity on the part of the apostles shows the absolute
absurdity of another theory advanced by those who deny
the resurrection of our Lord, namely, the theory that
his followers so eagerly expected him to rise from the
dead that their fevered brains finally imagined that he
had so risen and they testified to what was only a product
of their own fancy. In reality the disciples did not
expect Jesus to rise, and, as here recorded, when the truth
was reported to them, they refused to accept it until
proof upon proof had been given them and doubt and
unbelief became absolutely impossible. They were prepared,
however, for further proofs by the fact that the
tomb in which the body was laid had been found empty.
There is even more weighty evidence of the resurrection;
but those who deny this supremely important event must
give first some rational account of this empty tomb.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>L. The Walk To Emmaus. Ch. 24:13-35</head>

<quote rend="display">
13 And behold, two of them were going that very day to a
village named Emmaus, which was threescore furlongs from
Jerusalem. 24 And they communed with each other of all
these things which had happened. 15 And it came to pass,
while they communed and questioned together, that Jesus
himself drew near, and went with them. 16 But their eyes
were holden that they should not know him. 17 And he said
unto them, What communications are these that ye have one
with another, as ye walk? And they stood still, looking sad.
18 And one of them, named Cleopas, answering said unto him,
Dost thou alone sojourn in Jerusalem and not know the things
which are come to pass there in these days? 19 And he said
unto them, What things? And they said unto him, The things
concerning Jesus the Nazarene, who was a prophet mighty in
deed and word before God and all the people: 20 and how
the chief priests and our rulers delivered him up to be condemned
to death, and crucified him. 21 But we hoped that it
was he who should redeem Israel. Yea and besides all this,
it is now the third day since these things came to pass.
22 Moreover certain women of our company amazed
us, having been early at the tomb; 23 and when they
found not his body they came, saying, that they had also
seen a vision of angels, who said that he was alive. 24
And certain of them that were with us went to the tomb,
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
and found it even so as the women had said: but him they
saw not. 25 And he said unto them, O foolish men, and
slow of heart to believe in all that the prophets have spoken!
26 Behooved it not the Christ to suffer these things, and to
enter into his glory? 27 And beginning from Moses and from
all the prophets, he interpreted to them in all the scriptures
the things concerning himself. 28 And they drew nigh unto
the village, whither they were going: and he made as though
he would go further. 29 And they constrained him, saying,
Abide with us; for it is toward evening, and the day is now
far spent. And he went in to abide with them. 30 And it
came to pass, when he had sat down with them to meat, he
took the bread and blessed; and breaking <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> he gave to them.
31 And their eyes were opened, and they knew him; and he
vanished out of their sight. 32 And they said one to another,
Was not our heart burning within us, while he spake to us in
the way, while he opened to us the scriptures? 33 And they
rose up that very hour, and returned to Jerusalem, and found
the eleven gathered together, and them that were with them,
34 saying, The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared
to Simon. 35 And they rehearsed the things <hi rend='italic'>that happened</hi>
in the way, and how he was known of them in the breaking of
the bread.
</quote>

<p>
No man saw Christ rise; but many saw the risen Christ.
He appeared to Mary and to Peter and to James and to
<q>the eleven</q> and to more than five hundred disciples
at one time; but of the appearances on the day of his
resurrection none is recorded with more dramatic vividness
and more definiteness of detail than that related by
Luke when Jesus walked with two disciples toward
Emmaus.
</p>

<p>
This village was probably situated some seven miles
northwest of Jerusalem. Thither these two men were
moving with sad and discouraged hearts when Jesus
joined them and drew from them expressions of their
disappointment and despair. The One on whom they had
set their hopes of redemption for Israel had been put to
death, and although he had spoken mysteriously of a
resurrection on the third day, the day was passing, and
he had not been seen, although it was true that reports
had reached them of a vision of angels who said that he
was alive. Such in substance seem to have been their
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
words, in no small measure a confession of obstinate
unbelief. They had little expectation that the Lord
would fulfill his own promises; the third day of which
he had spoken was not ended and yet they were hopelessly
turning their backs upon Jerusalem; heavenly messengers
had sent them an announcement of cheer which they
refused to receive.
</p>

<p>
It was not strange, therefore, that Jesus rebuked them:
<q>O foolish men, and slow of heart to believe in all that
the prophets have spoken! Behooved it not the Christ
to suffer these things, and to enter into his glory?</q> It
is noticeable that Jesus did not chide them for refusing
to accept his own words, or those of their friends, or those
of angels; they were rebuked for not believing the Old
Testament. They had accepted it in part; as men often
accept just so much as suits their prejudices and tastes
and notions; but they failed to believe in all that the
prophets had spoken, and particularly the predictions of
Jesus' atoning death, and of his return to the heavenly
glory which he would share when he ascended. They
listened in wonder to his explanation of the Scriptures,
and finally as they were sitting at meat with him they
discovered that they were in the actual presence of their
living Lord. As he disappeared from sight, they hastened
back to the disciples in Jerusalem and found them already
wondering at the news that earlier in the day Jesus had
appeared to Peter.
</p>

<p>
No story tells us more impressively the truth that a
divine Saviour walks beside us all the way of our earthly
journey. It is pathetic that our eyes are so often dimmed
by unbelief that we fail to realize his presence. We
walk and are sad while we might be rejoicing in his companionship.
It may be as the Scriptures are opened to us,
or as we meet to break bread in his name, that our blindness
will be removed; and surely when the journey ends
and we enter the home toward which we are moving, we
shall see him face to face, and the vision will not fade in
deepening twilight, but grow more glorious through the
eternal day.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>M. Jesus Appearing To The Apostles. Ch. 24:36-43</head>

<quote rend="display">
36 And as they spake these things, he himself stood in the
midst of them, and saith unto them, Peace <hi rend='italic'>be</hi> unto you. 37
But they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they
beheld a spirit. 38 And he said unto them, Why are ye
troubled? and wherefore do questionings arise in your heart?
39 See my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me,
and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye behold me
having. 40 And when he had said this, he showed them his
hands and his feet. 41 And while they still disbelieved for
joy, and wondered, he said unto them, Have ye here anything
to eat? 42 And they gave him a piece of a broiled fish. 43
And he took it, and ate before them.
</quote>

<p>
The incidents of the day on which Jesus rose from the
dead, as recorded by Luke, form not only a sequence in
time, but also move in logical order. The empty tomb
can be explained by no other theory than that of a resurrection;
but this was only negative proof. To it was added
the actual appearance of Jesus to two disciples on their
way to Emmaus. Yet this was not evidence enough.
Some persons might believe that such an appearance had
been a mere vision, a phantom, a ghost; therefore, as
Luke relates the appearance of Jesus to the eleven disciples
in the upper room, after night had fallen, he lays
stress upon the fact that Jesus appeared in bodily form.
When the disciples saw him they thought that they did
see a mere specter, an apparition, a spirit, just as many
persons have thought, even to the present day; but to
forever dispel such a false impression, Jesus, by every
possible appeal to the senses, made it evident that he
possessed not an <q>immaterial,</q> or <q>spiritual,</q> or <q>celestial</q>
body, but the identical body of flesh and blood
which on Friday had been crucified and laid in the tomb;
in that actual body, scarred by the cruel nails, a body
capable of eating food, a material body which could be
touched and felt, he appeared to his disciples. Moreover,
he solemnly declared that he was not a disembodied spirit;
he showed them the wounds in his hands and feet; he
declared that a spirit does not have flesh and bones which
they saw he had; and finally, to remove every lingering
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
doubt, he took <q>a piece of a broiled fish</q> and <q>ate before
them.</q> The appearances and disappearances of Jesus
after his resurrection may have been mysterious or miraculous
as was his walking upon the sea in the days of
his previous ministry; but he gave his disciples to understand
by every conceivable, sensible sign that he had risen
from the dead in his actual, physical, human body. The
theory that the resurrection can be explained as a hallucination,
a vision, or an apparition is forever silenced by the
testimony of Luke, the careful historian, the intelligent
physician. Upon the foundation of the established fact
of a literal, bodily resurrection, this superstructure of
our Christian faith firmly stands.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>N. The Last Words. Ch. 24:44-49</head>

<quote rend="display">
44 And he said unto them, These are my words which I
spake unto you, while I was yet with you, that all things must
needs be fulfilled, which are written in the law of Moses, and
the prophets, and the psalms, concerning me. 45 Then
opened he their mind, that they might understand the scriptures;
46 and he said unto them, Thus it is written, that the
Christ should suffer, and rise again from the dead the third
day; 47 and that repentance and remission of sins should be
preached in his name unto all the nations, beginning from Jerusalem.
48 Ye are witnesses of these things. 49 And behold,
I send forth the promise of my Father upon you: but
tarry ye in the city, until ye be clothed with power from on high.
</quote>

<p>
It need not be supposed that the last words of Jesus
as recorded by Luke were spoken on the day of the resurrection
or at any one time or place. They more probably
indicate the general substance of those teachings which
are given by the risen Christ to his disciples during the
forty days between his resurrection and his ascension.
</p>

<p>
They are luminous with truths which are needed by the
disciples of Christ to-day. Among them are such facts
as these: The Scriptures contain authoritative messages
concerning Christ; these messages can be understood only
by those who believe in Christ and are guided by him;
the essential truths concerning Christ center in the facts
of his death and resurrection; in virtue of the salvation
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
thus secured, repentance and forgiveness of sins can be
preached; this salvation is to be proclaimed in all the
world; the followers of Christ are the messengers by whom
this good news is to be made known; the power for such
proclamation is imparted by the Spirit of Christ who
was manifested in new power on the Day of Pentecost,
and who is now an abiding Presence and a source of
limitless strength to all who seek to do the will of Christ
and to glorify his name.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>O. The Ascension. Ch. 24:50-53</head>

<quote rend="display">
50 And he led them out until <hi rend='italic'>they were</hi> over against Bethany:
and he lifted up his hands, and blessed them. 51 And
it came to pass, while he blessed them, he parted from them,
and was carried up into heaven. 52 And they worshipped
him, and returned to Jerusalem with great joy: 53 and were
continually in the temple, blessing God.
</quote>

<p>
The ascension of our Lord was an event quite distinct
from the resurrection; it occurred nearly six weeks later,
and indicates a number of supremely important truths.
</p>

<p>
1. Jesus then withdrew from the sphere of the seen
and physical to the sphere of the unseen and spiritual.
He did not pass up or down through vast spaces of the
skies. We are not to think of him as far away. He is
an unseen, divine Presence, superior to the limitations
of time and space, and capable of being manifest in any
period or place. The ascension should make us feel that
Jesus is near rather than far away.
</p>

<p>
2. Jesus then assumed universal power; not at the
time of his resurrection, but at the time of his ascension,
he was seated <q>on the right hand of the Majesty on high.</q>
This indicates divine omnipotence. It is the continual
representation of the New Testament that Jesus Christ has
all authority in heaven and on earth. The ascension should
therefore remind us of the limitless power of Christ.
</p>

<p>
3. It was therefore at the time of the ascension that
Jesus entered <q>into his glory.</q> Then it was that his
body was transformed, made deathless, <q>spiritual,</q>
celestial, immortal; and then he again began to share
the divine glory which he had with the Father <q>before
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
the world was.</q> The ascension, therefore, is a pledge and
type of the glory which yet awaits his followers. It is an
assurance that he yet will fulfill his promises and will
again appear; emerging from the sphere of the unseen he
will be manifested to all mankind as both the ideal Man
and as the Saviour of the world.
</p>

</div>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
